Breakout Session 4: Track B Ethical Considerations in the Design and  Conduct Clinical Trials of AI: A Qualitative Study  of Investigators' Experiences with Autonomous  AI for Diabetic Retinopathy Dr. Alaa Youssef Post-Doctoral Scholar, Stanford University School of Medicine Ethical Considerations in the Design and  Conduct of Clinical Trials of AI: Investigators'  Experiences with Autonomous AI for Pediatric  Diabetic Retinopathy Presenter: Alaa Youssef, PhD   Investigators: Danton Char, MD,M A S  S T A N F O R D  U N I V E R S I T Y  S C H O O L  O F  M E D I C I N E Risa Wolf, MD J O H N  H O P K I N S  H O S P I T A L FUNDING  ACKNOWLEDGEMENT NIH ODSS to National Eye Institute R01EY033233-01  Parent Award PI: Risa Wolf, MD Supplementary Award Title: Presenter:  Alaa Youssef, PhD  Post-Doctoral Fellow , Department of Radiology Stanford University School  of Medicine Recipient Investigator:  Danton Char, MD,M A S  Associate Professor of Anesthesia and Medical Ethics,  Stanford University School  of Medicine NIH Clinical Center PROJECT SUMMARY Study Objectives To determine the ethical considerations investigators  encountered and negotiated, designing and  conducting the first NIH-funded RCT of an  autonomous AI and related clinical trials.  Research Question How do clinical investigators recognize and  navigate ethical issues in the design and conduct of  clinical trials of AI? AI for Childrens  diabetiC Eye  ExamS (ACCESS)  Trial  Wolf, R.M., et al. (2024) METHODS Study Design  • Qualitative study using semi-structured interviews  with investigators involved in the design and  conduct of clinical trials of AI for diabetic  retinopathy screening. Participants • We employed purposeful sampling to engage  investigators from the ACCESS study. • We used snowball sampling for additional insights  from those involved in related trials of  autonomous AI.  RESULTS • We interviewed a total of eleven participants. • Six were from the NIH-funded ACCESS RCT,  including investigators, regulators, biostatistician. • Three investigators from an RCT in a developing  country. • Two investigators from the private sector. KEY THEMES There were unresolved ethical questions for all  seven principles. These issues included: • Measuring social value • Establishing scientific validity • Ensuring fair subject selection  • Determining risk-benefit ratios • Obtaining  informed consent Social Value What are social values of AI that should guide  design of study outcomes, and how could these  outcomes be measured? • Difficulty in defining and agreeing on the social value AI adds to  clinical trials. • Challenges in designing study outcomes that effectively  measure the social value of AI. ”I think we should see what [social value] is  from the patient’s perspective that would be  beneficial and then identify and measure that  potentially with a quantitative metric.” (008) Scientific Validity What do you compare the AI to, to ensure  that the trial is scientifically valid? • The challenge of integrating AI model outputs into  existing clinical workflows adds complexity to trials. • Difficulty in finding an appropriate benchmark for AI,  unlike more straightforward comparisons in drug trials “I think — you know — there are some issues  with AI around [scientific validity] because it’s  more of a systems intervention...it’s hard to see  whether individual randomization really  makes sense.” (001) Fair Subject  Selection How do you select trial participants fairly,  when current access to care (and gold  standard validations) is already disparate? • Fair subject selection emerged as a critical focus area. • Challenges in using AI tools to expand screening access due  to existing health disparities and socioeconomic factors. “It’s tricky to ensure equitable access to AI screening,  especially for those less likely to receive regular diabetes  care. Monitoring the prevalence of diabetic retinopathy  post-AI implementation and understanding the reasons  behind disparities in screening rates and follow-up care  are crucial.” (002) Informed Consent What are important barriers to informed  consent in clinical trials of AI? • Key barriers include privacy concerns and the challenge of  explaining AI's technical aspects for informed decisions. • Difficulty in ensuring understanding of privacy and  confidentiality with AI tools. • Transparency in participants' data use for AI development. “The short answer is... that the informed consent that  we’ve been using for a very long time, and really not  suitable for digital health and not suitable for AI for  many, many reasons.  And IRB committees in general  don’t understand AI, so the whole system needs to be  reconsidered.” (009) CONCLUSION This study highlights practical ethical challenges investigators need  to consider and negotiate in conducting clinical trials of AI,  exemplified by the diabetic retinopathy screening use-case.  FUTURE WORK • Expand empirical research to understand ethical  challenges in diverse clinical settings. • Develop comprehensive ethical frameworks tailored  to AI's unique attributes in clinical research. • Strengthen normative guidelines to safeguard patient  safety in AI trials. REFERENCES • Youssef, A., Nichol, A., Martinez, N., Larson, D.B., Abramoff, M., Wolf, R., Char, D. Ethical Considerations in the Design and Conduct Clinical Trials of AI : A Qualitative Study of Investigators' Experiences with Autonomous AI for Diabetic Retinopathy. (In Submission) • Wolf, R.M., Channa, R., Liu, T.Y.A. et al. Autonomous artificial intelligence increases screening and follow-up for diabetic retinopathy in youth: the ACCESS randomized control trial. Nat Commun 15, 421 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-44676-z • Abràmoff MD, Tobey D, Char DS. Lessons Learned About Autonomous AI: Finding a Safe, Efficacious, and Ethical Path Through the Development Process. Am J Ophthalmol. 2020 Jun;214:134-142. doi: 10.1016/j.ajo.2020.02.022. • Alaa Youssef, Michael Abramoff & Danton Char (2023) Is the Algorithm Good in a Bad World, or Has It Learned to be Bad? The Ethical Challenges of “Locked” Versus “Continuously Learning” and “Autonomous” Versus “Assistive” AI Tools in Healthcare, The American Journal of Bioethics, 23:5, 43-45, DOI: 10.1080/15265161.2023.2191052 • Emanuel EJ, Wendler D, Grady C. What Makes Clinical Research Ethical? JAMA. 2000;283(20):2701–2711. doi:10.1001/jama.283.20.2701 Contact