Commission on Certification for 
Health Informatics and Information 
Management (CCHIIM)
Recertification Guide
Maintenance of Certification
Revised Spring 2021
Regis tered Health Information A dministr ator (RHIA ®)
Regis tered Health Information T echnician (RHIT®)
Certiﬁed Coding Associa te (CCA®)
Certiﬁed Coding Specialist (CCS®)
Certiﬁed Coding Specialist—Ph ysician-based( CCS-P®)
Certiﬁed Health Data Analy st (CHD A®)
Certiﬁed in Healthcar e Priv acy and Security ( CHPS®)
Certiﬁed Documentation Impr ovement Pr actitioner ( CDIP®)
Certiﬁed Healthcar e Technology Specialist ( CHTS)
Certiﬁed Pr ofessional in Health Informatics ( CPHI)  
Gill Sans (F ont)'4,-
118 . 21
AHIMA Recertification Guide 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ABOUT THE RECERTIFICATION GUIDE
CCHIIM Mission     . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
CCHIIM RECERTIFICATION PROGRAM   . . . . . . . 3
AHIMA Certification –  
Your Best Professional Value   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Recertification Terminology    . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Recertification Process        . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Qualifying Continuing Education Activities and  
Calculation of CEUs   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Recertification Fee  
(plus any applicable extension fees)   . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Certification Status   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
Additional Recertification Processes   . . . . . . . . . . . 12 
Frequently Asked Questions   . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
Appendix A – HIIM Domains  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
AHIMA Recertification Guide 3CCHIIM Mission
Through certification, CCHIIM ensures the competency of professionals practicing health informatics and infor -
mation management worldwide  .
CCHIIM Values
• The application of evidence-based best practices for certification;
• The validation of workforce competence through professional certification; 
• The commitment to ongoing professional development, lifelong learning, and workforce excellence; and 
• The recognition of CCHIIM-certified professionals’ role in maintaining and enhancing quality health  
information for the safety of the public and the improvement of healthcare  .
CCHIIM Recertification Program
Purpose
The CCHIIM recertification (maintenance of an AHIMA certification) program ensures that CCHIIM-certified 
professionals demonstrate ongoing competence in the domain areas in which they are certified, through either 
maintenance or enhancement activities  . For the purposes of recertification (maintenance of an AHIMA certifica -
tion), CCHIIM further defines maintenance and enhancement activities as follows:
Maintenance: Completion of educational programs that provide updated training and skills to allow  
continued competence in HIIM by earning the required number of continuing education units (CEUs)  
in any of the HIIM Domains  .
Enhancement: Completion of educational programs that result in expanded knowledge and skills to enhance 
professional growth in HIIM by earning additional CEUs in a specific HIIM domain  . This is beyond the  
requirement to maintain certification  . 
The NCCA’s definition of continuing competence is, “demonstrating specified levels of knowledge, skills, or 
ability not only at the time of initial certification but throughout an individual’s professional career  .”
AHIMA Recertification Guide 4Congratulations on earning your AHIMA professional credential! 
You’ve marked yourself as a leader and HIIM expert, and shown 
your support for the healthcare profession. But there’s more to  
certification than that. Through it you’ve increased your  
chances for success in your chosen career.
AHIMA Certification—Your Best Professional Value
Receiving an AHIMA Credential Means:
• Demonstrating commitment to your professional area of expertise, a dedication to quality healthcare, and a 
need to establish high standards in managing confidential health information  .
• Offering ongoing value to your profession and employer through continuation of your personal education,  
allowing you to maintain your expertise and contribute at the highest levels  .
• Having an edge over noncertified professionals  . AHIMA certification signifies experience and knowledge,  
and validates professional competence for employers, consumers, and yourself  .
What Are the Biggest Benefits of Recertification (Maintenance of an AHIMA Certification)?
• Return on investment from the high value of being AHIMA certified  .
• Professional prestige helps you remain competitive in a tough job market  .
• Demonstration of your ongoing commitment and competence in HIIM  .
• Networking opportunities with similarly credentialed peers who share your level of expertise  .
To Recertify You Must:
1 . Obtain the required number of CEUs during your recertification cycle  .
2 . Participate in accepted and qualified CEU activities  .
3 . Report your CEUs by the due date  .
4 . Document, retain and file your CEU activity for auditing and more in the CEU Center of your MyAHIMA 
account  .
5 . Ensure your recertification fee is paid by the due date  .
Recertification Terminology
Recertification Cycle: The two (2) year cycle during which time an individual must obtain and earn their designated number 
of CEUs and pay the recertification fee(s) in order to maintain their credential(s) in order to maintain their credential(s) .
Anniversary Date:  The date an individual successfully passed their initial certification exam, which is also the  
start date for their recertification cycle  .
Inactive Period:  If an individual has not successfully met the recertification requirements during their recertifica -
tion cycle, a six (6) month Inactive Period will begin following the recertification cycle end date  . During the Inactive 
period, CEUs earned during the recertification cycle can be reported in the CEU center  . A recertification extension fee 
will also be added to the credential holder’s account if the credential falls into the Inactive Period  .
Reinstatement Period:  If an individual has not successfully met the recertification requirements during their Inac -
tive Period, a six (6) month Reinstatement Period follows the Inactive Period end date  .
AHIMA Recertification Guide 5During the Reinstatement Period:
• The credential(s) is considered revoked  .
• A reinstatement fee will be added to the credential holder’s account once the CEU requirement has been met  .
• CEUs earned during the first twelve (12) months of the recertification cycle will become non-applicable to 
reinstate the credential  .
• CEUs earned during the second twelve (12) months of the two-year recertification cycle until the reinstate -
ment end date can be reported  .
• If recertification requirements are not met by the Reinstatement period end date, the credential will be perma -
nently revoked  .
Recertification Process
CEU Requirements for Single Credential
If You Have a(n)… You Must Earn…
Certified Coding Associate (CCA) 20 CEUs
Certified Coding Specialist (CCS) 20 CEUs
Certified Coding Specialist—Physician-based (CCS-P) 20 CEUs
Registered Health Information Administrator (RHIA) 30 CEUs
Registered Health Information Technician (RHIT) 20 CEUs
Certified Health Data Analyst (CHDA) 30 CEUs
Certified in Healthcare Privacy and Security (CHPS) 30 CEUs
Certified Documentation Improvement Practitioner (CDIP) 30 CEUs
CEU Requirements for Multiple Credentials
If you have more than one AHIMA credential, you must earn ten (10) additional CEUs per credential during your 
two-year recertification cycle, up to a total of fifty (50) CEUs  . These CEUs may not be duplicated or used for more 
than one credential  . Below are examples  .
Credential Required Number of CEUs
CCS and CCS-P (20 + 10) 30
CHPS with RHIT (30 + 10) 40
RHIA with CHDA (30 + 10) 40
RHIA with CDIP (30 + 10) 40
RHIA with CCS and CCS-P (30 + 10 + 10) 50
CHDA with CCS, CHPS, and CDIP (30 + 10 + 10) 50
RHIA with CCS, CCS-P, CHDA, and CDIP (30 + 10 + 10) 50
AHIMA Recertification Guide 6Recertification Cycle
Health informatics and information management (HIIM) is a constantly evolving field, and professionals in this 
field require the most current knowledge to move the profession forward  . Best practices, technology, privacy and 
security, coding updates, healthcare laws and regulations change frequently  . For these reasons a recertification 
cycle of two years has been established, during which time certificants will be required to attain a specific number 
of CEUs in order to update existing knowledge and skills as well as acquire new knowledge and skills relating to 
advances in the HIIM field and changing job responsibilities  .
Initial:  The initial recertification cycle for newly credentialed certificants (first credential obtained) begins the 
day the exam is passed and ends two years later  . A credential is awarded when a candidate:
• Passes the certification examination, OR
• Passes the certification examination AND has successfully completed the academic requirements of an HIIM 
program accredited by CAHIIM (for RHIA and RHIT testing candidates)  . The academic prerequisite is con -
firmed when an official transcript is submitted and approved  .
• Initial for RHIT or RHIA Early Testing Candidates: The initial recertification cycle for RHIT or RHIA early 
testers will begin once official transcripts have been approved  . Early test takers will have up to one (1) year 
after the exam is passed to submit an official transcript  . If transcripts are not submitted within the timeframe 
stated, the exam will have to be re-taken and passed  .
Example
Exam taken: Exam pass date: Transcript approval date: Recertification cycle is:
CCS 7/21/2020 N/A 7/21/2020–7/20/2022
Ongoing:  The recertification cycle for subsequently obtained credential(s) begins with the start of the next cycle 
date for the first or initial credential  . For the remainder of the current cycle the second credential will be placed 
into a sync cycle which waives it from recertification requirements  .
Example
If existing credential is: Current cycle is: After obtaining: The new cycle for both credentials is:
RHIA11/18/2020–
11/17/2022 *CCS on 12/8/2020 11/18/2020–11/17/2022
*  In this example, CEUs earned between December 9, 2020, and November 17, 2022, can be reported for the first 
credential (RHIA) only.
Qualifying Continuing Education Activities and Calculation of CEUs
Continuing Education (CE) Content
CEUs must be earned within your recertification cycle and must be relevant to the HIIM field as presented 
in the HIIM domains to be eligible for CE credit  . Eighty (80) percent of required recertification CEUs must 
be earned within the HIIM domains (see Appendix A)  . The remaining twenty (20) percent can include 
AHIMA Recertification Guide 7participation in CE activities on topics not included in the domains but relevant to the credential holder’s 
professional position  .
Calculation of CEUs
Calculation of CEUs is based upon clock hours  . 0 .5 CEUs are given for every thirty (30) minutes of attendance or 
participation that is fixed in length  .
A session lasting 30 to 44 minutes will be accepted for 0  .5 CEU credits; a session lasting less than 30 minutes will 
not be accepted for CEU credit  . CEU credit should be calculated according to the following method: 
Session Length CEU Credits
0–29 minutes  (0–0  .49 hrs) 0 CEUs
30–44 minutes  (0  .50–0  .74 hrs) 0 .5 CEUs
45–89 minutes  (0  .75–1  .49 hrs) 1 CEU
90–104 minutes  (1  .50–1  .74 hrs) 1 .5 CEUs
105–149 minutes  (1  .75–2  .49 hrs) 2 CEUs
150–164 minutes  (2  .50–2  .74 hrs) 2 .5 CEUs
165–209 minutes  (2  .75–3  .49 hrs) 3 CEUs
CE Activities
1 . Participation in educational programs on topics relevant to HIIM  .
a . Educational portions of AHIMA meetings (national convention, state, local, or regional meetings)— one 
(1) CEU for each 60 minutes of participation
b . Educational portions of programs of allied health and other relevant professional associations— one (1) 
CEU for each 60 minutes of participation
c . Educational portions of programs sponsored by organizations or vendors on topics that maintain,  
update, or enlarge knowledge and skills relevant to the HIIM profession— one (1) CEU for each  
60 minutes of participation
d . Telecommunications and teleseminars relevant to the HIIM profession— one (1) CEU for each  
60 minutes of participation
2 . Participation in educational programs of study that address HIIM-relevant subject areas  .
a . Accredited post-secondary courses attended for credit, including traditional on-campus, online, or 
distance education administered through a college or university  . This includes courses taken in pursuit of 
HIIM profession-relevant associate, baccalaureate, master, or doctorate degrees  . All coursework and final 
exams must be completed by the recertification cycle end date— fifteen (15) CEUs for each semester/
trimester credit; ten (10) CEUs for each quarter credit. CEUs earned in this manner cannot be reported for 
a future credential.  
Example: If the credential holder has an active RHIT credential and is seeking to take the RHIA exam, 
CEUs earned from completed courses can only be applied to the RHIT credential.
b . Audit of academic course or relevant non-credit adult education course, including attendance at a college 
or university course with permission and following regulations, without completing necessary require -
ments for full credit  . Course must be completed by the recertification cycle end date— six (6) CEUs for 
each semester/trimester credit; four (4) CEUs for each quarter credit. CEUs earned in this manner cannot 
be reported for a future credential.  
Example: If the credential holder has an active RHIT credential and is seeking to take the RHIA exam, 
CEUs earned from completed courses can only be applied to the RHIT credential. 
c . In-person, online or distance education programs relevant to HIIM core content, that are not a college or 
university credit course, or a prior-approved AHIMA program, will be subject to review through a validation 
process  . All program coursework and exams must be completed by the recertification cycle end date (CEUs 
must be determined on an individual basis by CCHIIM).
AHIMA Recertification Guide 83 . Publication and presentation of material relevant to HIIM  .
a .  Publication is the development of an original work, relevant to the HIIM profession, reproduced by 
written or electronic means for general dissemination to the public (unless required as part of work 
responsibilities—see section VI  .6 .a and VI  .6 .b) .
• Author of a textbook, workbook, or manual— thirty (30) CEUs
• Editor of a textbook, workbook, or manual— twenty (20) CEUs
• Author of an article in a research journal— fifteen (15) CEUs
• Author of a chapter in a textbook, workbook, or manual— ten (10) CEUs
• Author of an educational article in a professional or trade journal— five (5) CEUs
• Editor of a professional or trade journal— five (5) CEUs
• AHIMA course writing (for example, Virtual Lab, Courseshare, EHR Hybrid Environment six-lesson 
course)— five (5) CEUs 
• Author of an educational article in a local or state newsletter— two (2) CEUs
• Reviewer of book manuscripts prior to publications— one (1) CEU per chapter
b . Presentation is the development of an original work delivered to an audience  .
• Speaker at an educational program— one (1) CEU for each 15 minutes of podium time
• Panel participant at an educational program— one (1) CEU for each 60 minutes of podium time
4 . Independent study activities relevant to the HIIM profession  .
a . Study groups devoted to topics relevant to HIIM  . CEUs will not be granted if the study groups are used 
to prepare for the exam or certification held— one (1) CEU for each 60 minutes of participation
b . Enrollment in one or more AHIMA independent study program modules (CEUs pre-determined  
by CCHIIM)
c . Enrollment in independent study programs relevant to AHIMA core education content areas from 
organizations other than AHIMA (AHIMA prior approval required)  .
d . AHIMA post-test offerings accompanying a Journal of AHIMA article or book published by  
AHIMA (CEUs pre-determined by CCHIIM)
e . Advanced research (for example, reading and analyzing material above and beyond one’s knowledge of the 
subject matter) in an HIIM topic area to support activities associated with an expert panel,  
workgroup, or task force of AHIMA or its affiliate— one (1) CEU per each year 
5 . Exam Development activities – such as item writing and job analysis
• Subject Matter Experts that volunteer to participate in AHIMA’s certification exam development activi -
ties will receive 1 CEU for every hour of participation  . 
• Subject Matter Experts that volunteer to participate in AHIMA’s job analysis activities will receive 1 CEU 
for every hour of participation  . 
• To volunteer in AHIMA’s exam development activities please send an email to SME@AHIMA  .org
6 . Other activities
• Substantive oversight and involvement of directed clinical practice on behalf of a Commission on  
Accreditation for Health Informatics and Information Management Education (CAHIIM) accredited 
program— five (5) CEUs per student supervised with a maximum of ten (10) CEUs for student supervision 
allowed in each recertification cycle
AHIMA Recertification Guide 9   Substantive oversight and involvement includes, but is not limited to:
•  Creating a training plan and schedule of activities
• Developing and assigning project(s)
• Providing direction and guidance
• Conducting review of progress and providing feedback
• Conducting student evaluation at the conclusion of the project(s)
• Other considerations:  CEUs for other individuals assigned as mentors— one (1) CEU for every  
60 minutes of direct contact with a maximum of five (5) CEUs (five hours of contact) per student, 
and a maximum of ten (10) CEUs allowed in each recertification cycle.
• Participation in an AHIMA volunteer leader conference, breakout session or work group where 
learning and skill development occurs (CEUs pre-determined by AHIMA)
• Internet educational offerings relevant to AHIMA core education content areas (AHIMA prior- 
approval required)
• Facilitator for an AHIMA Community of Practice (CoP or other online HIIM community)— five (5) CEUs 
for one year service, per community, each year of the two-year cycle
• Activities defined by the guidelines for approval of CE programs for state, local, and regional  
HIM associations
• Exceptional events recognized by the CCHIIM
Non-Qualifying Continuing Education Activities 
Examples of activities that do not qualify for CEUs are as follows  . The list is illustrative and not intended to  
be all-inclusive  .
• Responsibilities that fall within the normal parameters of an individual’s job description, including, but not limited 
to, the following: (1) staff meetings; (2) grand rounds; (3) preparation for and/or participation in accreditation and 
licensure surveys; (4) preparation of procedure, policy, or administrative manuals; (5) conducting tours;  
(6) participation in career day activities; (7) development of employee and staff training materials
• Published materials and/or presentations developed as a direct part of an individual’s employment 
• Serving in a volunteer leadership role for AHIMA or any other professional organization
• Instructing or teaching a class
• Summarizing articles, audiotapes, or video
 
Entering your CEUs
To recertify, you must enter your CEUs and pay the recertification fee online through your MyAHIMA account  . 
On the last day of your recertification cycle, your account will automatically be reviewed by the system to 
determine if you have met all applicable recertification requirements  . If you have met all of your recertification 
requirements, your cycle will roll over to the subsequent two-year recertification cycle  . 
If you have not met all your recertification requirements at that time, your cycle will roll into the Inactive Period  .  
In order to avoid penalty (including late fees and a revoked credential), recertification requirements must be met 
no later than the last day of your recertification cycle end date  .
Please log into your MyAHIMA account - CEU Center to track your recertification progress  .
Recertification Fees (plus any applicable extension fees):
Single Credential
RHIA  $218
RHIT  $218
AHIMA Recertification Guide 10CCA  $218
CCS  $218
CCS-P  $218
CHDA  $218
CDIP  $218
CHPS  $218
Extension  
Fee $50
All fees are non-refundable
*If you paid fee(s) that are owed to AHIMA (e  .g . recertification, exam registration, recertification extension) and 
if the funds are revoked, disputed, or have insufficient funds your credential will be placed in a Revoked status 
until the fee(s) and any additional fees are paid in full  .*
Multiple Credentials
Primary credential (based on credential hierarchy) fee, plus $50 for each additional credential  .
Credential Hierarchy:
• Upon completion of the requirements, a baccalaureate or higher level HIM credential (RHIA) replaces an 
associate-based HIM credential (RHIT)  . Once granted, the baccalaureate-based credential is recognized and 
CEUs for this credential need only be maintained  . 
Note: Credential holders who are not AHIMA members pay the above fees on a biennial basis. Credential holders 
who are AHIMA members pay reduced recertification fees on an biennial basis. The cost of your recertification will 
be based on your membership status when your certification expires. 
Recertification dues will be invoiced in the AHIMA CEU Center and payments must be made by or before 
your recertification cycle end date. All CEUs and recertification requirements must be met before paying the 
fees to recertify. 
Certification Status
Status Types
a .  Active: Active status is based on meeting the recertification requirements within the two (2) year 
recertification cycle  . 
b .  Inactive: Inactive status is based on failure to complete the recertification requirements within the two (2) 
year recertification cycle  . Inactive status lasts for a six (6) month Inactive Period, after which status moves to 
Revoked if recertification requirements are not met (see details of Revoked status below)  .
The credential(s) may not be used during the period of inactive status  . To reactive a credential to Active 
status, credential holders must meet original recertification requirements and recertification extension fee  .
c .  Revoked:
i . Based on failure to complete recertification requirements within two (2) year recertification cycle, or 
the six (6) month Inactive Period  . It is important that credential holders report their CEUs and pay 
the recertification fee before the end of their recertification cycle  . Failure to do this will result in your 
credential(s) being revoked  . Please see the status timeline below  .
Active --> Inactive --> Revoked
*There are six months between each status period*
ii . Based on CCHIIM appeals committee or AHIMA Professional Ethics Committee decision regarding 
misconduct  .
AHIMA Recertification Guide 11Individuals may not use the applicable credential(s) once they have been revoked  .
d . Retired:
i . Based on a voluntary request of a fully retired individual who is no longer working in the field of HIIM  . 
The individual may retire and begin work in a field unrelated to HIIM so long as he or she no longer 
holds any HIIM responsibilities  . The individual’s credential(s) must be active and in good standing 
at the time of the request  . Retired requests must be done in writing  . Requests can be submitted to 
Certification@ahima  .org . Requests to un-retire a credential can only be done once every 5 years  . In 
order to re-activate a retired credential, a three hundred ($300  .00) re-activation fee will be required  . Re-
activation requests can be submitted to Certification@ahima  .org .
An individual falling under the retired status must use the term “retired” following his or her credential 
in order to differentiate from the Active Status credential, e  .g . John Smith, RHIA (Retired)  .
Note: Credential holders who are retired may continue to maintain recertification requirements and uphold 
an active credential, if they so choose  .
e .  Voluntarily Relinquished:  Based on a voluntary request of an individual who no longer wishes to maintain his or 
her credential and voluntarily withdraws from the recertification process  . The individual’s credential(s) must be 
active and in good standing at the time of the request  . Voluntarily relinquished requests must be done in writing  . 
Requests can be submitted to Certification@ahima  .org . Once a credential has been voluntarily relinquished it 
cannot be placed back into an active status  . The certification examination must be passed again to re-activate the 
credential  .
Individuals may not use the applicable credential(s) once they have been voluntarily relinquished  .
Reinstatement of Credentials
Individuals whose credentials have been revoked can can complete the reinstatement process by following the 
instructions below  .
 The CCHIIM provides two ways to reinstate a credential (up to 6 months following the end date of the  
inactive period  .):
Option A:  Reactivate by CE
a .   Obtain and submit the required number of CEUs into your CEU center  .  During the Reinstatement 
Period the credential(s) is considered revoked  . CEUs earned from the half-way point of the two-year 
recertification cycle until the reinstatement end date can be reported  . CEUs earned and reported dur -
ing the first twelve (12) of the recertification cycle will become non-applicable to reinstate the creden -
tial . If recertification requirements are not met by the Reinstatement period end date, the credential 
will be permanently revoked  .
b .  Pay the appropriate reinstatement fee of $368  .00 by logging into your CEU Center  .
Option B:  Reactivate by Exam
a .  Retake the applicable certification exam 
Note: CEUs accumulated after the end of the previous recertification cycle can be reported for reactivation  . How -
ever, these CEUs cannot be used or reported for the next cycle  . Certificants who report or use CEUs accumulated 
after the recertification cycle end date to reactivate their credential(s) will automatically be placed on the audit list 
for the next cycle  .
Upon official notification, the individual will be placed in the subsequent two-year recertification cycle following 
reinstatement  .
Based on your credential hierarchy order, your primary credential must be reinstated first or in an active status 
before any other credentials will be reinstated.
AHIMA Recertification Guide 12Additional Recertification Processes
Audits
Each year a percentage of individuals are randomly selected for audit  . Individuals selected for audits will be noti -
fied in writing and will be required to submit verifiable documentation (for example, certificates of  
attendance or similar materials) for each activity listed in the CEU Center by the due date specified on  
the audit notification material  .
Verifiable documentation can include certificates of attendance, program materials, or other information  
provided by the program sponsor that verify program date, length, and subject matter (that is, agenda, program  
outline, handout, meeting summary, or meeting transcript)  .
It is therefore strongly recommended that CEU participants retain a hard or electronic copy of all records in their 
files for at least two years following following the cycle end date  . Individuals who fail to respond to the audit re -
quest by the specified due date or are found to have submitted false information on their recertification form may 
be denied recertification  .
Waiver of Recertification Requirements 
The Commission may for a good cause waive or reduce the CEU requirement  . Certificants may request a  
temporary waiver by submitting a written request to the Commission for consideration  .
a .   Temporary Waiver—Temporary waiver recertification requirements due to extenuating circumstances or 
hardships (for example, financial hardship, illness, unforeseen circumstances, and natural catastrophes)  . 
Temporary waiver requests must be done in writing  . Requests must include documentation showing why 
the recertification requirements could not be met  . Examples of documentation can be unemployment 
letter, obituary or death certificate, medical records etc  . Requests and documentation must be submitted to 
Certification@ahima  .org . Please be advised, all requests can take up to 30 days to be processed and you will 
be notified via email with a decision  . The individual’s credential(s) must be active and in good standing at the 
time of the request  .
Appeals
Individuals whose credential has been revoked and the reinstatement period has expired may appeal to the 
CCHIIM  . Additional information on submitting an appeal to the CCHIIM is available at  
https://www  .ahima  .org/certification-careers/apply/policies-appeals/  .
AHIMA Recertification Guide 13Frequently Asked Questions
What is recertification?
Recertification (maintenance of an AHIMA certification) is a process that ensures CCHIIM-certified 
professionals demonstrate ongoing competence in the domain areas in which they are certified, through either 
maintenance or enhancement activities  .
What is certification maintenance?
Certification maintenance is the completion of educational programs that provide updated training and skills to 
allow continued competence in HIIM by earning the required number of CEUs in any of the HIIM domains  .
What is certification enhancement?
Certification enhancement is the completion of educational programs that result in expanded knowledge and skills 
to enhance professional growth in HIIM by earning additional CEUs in a specific HIIM domain  . This is beyond the 
requirement to maintain certification  .
What is the initial recertification cycle?
For individuals certified on December 12, 2020, and after, the initial recertification cycle for newly credentialed 
certificants (first credential obtained) is two years beginning on the day the credential is awarded, which is also 
the date the certification exam was passed  .
Example: If you passed the RHIA examination on January 8, 2020, your recertification cycle begins on January 8, 
2020, and ends on January 7, 2022, for a period of (2) years  . CEUs earned during this period can be reported when 
you recertify .
What if I am an RHIA or RHIT early tester—when does my initial recertification cycle begin?
Once your transcript is reviewed and eligibility is confirmed, your recertification cycle begins the day your 
transcript is approved  . You will have up to a year from the time the exam is passed to submit your transcript  .
What do I need to do in order to recertify or maintain my certification status?
To recertify or maintain your certification, you will need to earn and report the required amount of CEUs and 
pay your recertification fee(s) within your recertification cycle  . This can be done by logging into your CEU center 
at MyAhima  .org
I currently have only one (1) AHIMA credential. How many CEUs must I accumulate during the reporting period?
CEU Requirements for Single Credential
If You Have a(n)… You Must Earn…
Certified Coding Associate (CCA) 20 CEUs
Certified Coding Specialist (CCS) 20 CEUs
Certified Coding Specialist—Physician-based (CCS-P) 20 CEUs
Registered Health Information Administrator (RHIA) 30 CEUs
Registered Health Information Technician (RHIT) 20 CEUs
Certified Health Data Analyst (CHDA) 30 CEUs
Certified in Healthcare Privacy and Security (CHPS) 30 CEUs
Certified Documentation Improvement Practitioner (CDIP) 30 CEUs
AHIMA Recertification Guide 14I currently have multiple (two or more) AHIMA credentials. How many CEUs must I accumulate 
during the reporting period?
CEU Requirements for Multiple Credentials
If you have more than one AHIMA credential, you must earn ten (10) additional CEUs per credential during your 
two-year recertification cycle, up to a maximum of fifty (50) CEUs  . These CEUs may not be duplicated or used for 
more than one credential  . Below are examples  .
Credential Required Number of CEUs
CCS and CCS-P (20 + 10) 30
CHPS with RHIT (30 + 10) 40
RHIA with CHDA (30 + 10) 40
RHIA with CDIP (30 + 10) 40
RHIA with CCS and CCS-P (30 + 10 + 10) 50
CHDA with CCS, CHPS, and CDIP (30 + 10 + 10+ 10) 50
RHIA with CCS, CCS-P, CHDA, and CDIP (30 + 10 + 10+ 10 + 10) 50
How can I earn AHIMA CEUs? 
AHIMA offers many opportunities to earn CEUs through meetings, audio and webinars, distance learning 
courses, and other activities that qualify for CEUs  . For additional information on these products, please visit  
ahimastore  .org .
Can I use CEUs earned through organizations other than AHIMA?
Yes . CCHIIM accepts CEUs earned through other organizations, provided they qualify as valid CE  
activities and are relevant to HIIM  . See the CEU Activities section for additional details on accepted CEUs  
and calculation methods  .
Can I get CEUs for college courses?
Yes . CCHIIM accepts CEUs earned through participation in formal educational programs of study that address 
subject areas related to HIIM  . Please note you cannot use courses taken prior to your certification  . See the CEU 
Activities section for additional details on accepted CEUs and calculation methods  .
Can I earn AHIMA CEUs by earning another AHIMA certification?
No . At this time CCHIIM has not designated this as a valid CE activity  .
How can I find out how many AHIMA CEUs I have earned so far?
CEUs earned directly through an AHIMA activity where badges are used such as at the AHIMA annual convention 
and the Assembly on Education Symposium will be automatically recorded in your AHIMA CEU Center  .
Other AHIMA activities and non-AHIMA earned CEUs must be manually recorded in your AHIMA CEU  
Center  . The CEU Center tracks how many CEUs you have earned within your current recertification cycle  .
AHIMA Recertification Guide 15What fees are required for renewing my certification?
For AHIMA-Certified Nonmembers:
Single Credential
• Primary credential fee of $218 per cycle
Multiple Credentials
Primary credential (based on credential hierarchy) fee, plus $50 for each additional credential per cycle  .
Examples:
1 .  RHIT earns RHIA
• Year 1 = no fee
• Year 2 = $218 recertification fee for RHIA
Based on credential hierarchy, the RHIA credential replaces the RHIT  .
2 .  CCA earns CCS
• Year 1 = no fee
• Year 2 = $218 recertification fee for CCS
Two-year total fees = $218
Based on credential hierarchy, the CCS credential replaces the CCA  .
3 .  RHIA earns CHDA
• Year 1 = no fee
• Year 2 = $218 recertification fee for RHIA, plus $50 recertification fee for CHDA
Two-year total fees = $268
4 .  RHIT earns CCS
• Year 1 = no fee
• Year 2 =  $218 recertification fee for RHIT (first credential) plus $50 recertification fee for CCS  
(second credential)
Two-year total fees = $268
For AHIMA Members: 
The cost of your recertification will be based on your membership status when your certification expires  . 
What should I do with my CEU documentation? 
For your own convenience, in case you are selected for a random audit of your reported CEUs, you should upload 
all CEU documentation into your CEU Center at the time you report your CEUs  . In addition, you should retain all 
documentation for one (1) full year past your certification renewal date, in the event you are audited  . 
Do CEUs carry over from one reporting period to another?
No . You can only report CEUs earned during the current recertification cycle  .
What if I don’t have enough CEUs to recertify or maintain my certification?
If you do not report the required number of CEUs and pay the appropriate recertification fee(s) by the end of your 
recertification cycle, your credential(s) will be placed in an inactive status  . Your account will be charged an recer -
tification extension fee  . CCHIIM provides a six (6) month window (the inactive period) for credential holders to 
meet the recertification requirements before the revocation process begins  . 
AHIMA Recertification Guide 16What does revocation mean?
If you fail to reactivate by the end of the inactive period, your certification will be revoked  . Once your certification is 
revoked, you are no longer AHIMA certified and your certification can only be reinstated by the following options:
Option A:  Reactivate by CE
a .   Reinstatement Period: If an individual has not successfully met the recertification requirements dur -
ing their Inactive Period, a six (6) month Reinstatement Period follows the Inactive Period end date  .
     During the Reinstatement Period:
• The credential(s) is considered revoked  .
• A reinstatement fee will be added to the credential holder’s account once the CEU requirement has been 
met .
• CEUs earned during the first twelve (12) months of the recertification cycle will become non-applicable 
to reinstate the credential  .
• CEUs earned during the second twelve (12) months of the two-year recertification cycle until the rein -
statement end date can be reported  .
• If recertification requirements are not met by the Reinstatement period end date, the credential will be 
permanently revoked  .
b .  Pay the appropriate reinstatement fee by logging into your CEU center  .
Note: CEUs accumulated after the end of the previous recertification cycle can be reported for reactivation.  
However, these CEUs cannot be used or reported for the next cycle. Certificants who report or use CEUs  
accumulated after the recertification cycle end date to reactivate their credential(s) will automatically be  
placed on the audit list for the next cycle.
Option B:  Reactivate by exam
Retake the applicable certification exam  .
What is the yearly audit?
In order to ensure high standards of competency and continuing education, AHIMA/CCHIIM will conduct an 
annual audit  . A randomly selected percentage sample of recertification forms submitted from the prior reporting 
period will be sampled to participate in the audit  . The audit will be conducted at each credential level  . If audited, 
you will be required to provide documented proof of all CEU activity reported during the reporting period to the 
AHIMA national office within 30 days  .
If you are unable to provide documented proof within 30 days, your certification will be considered revoked  . All 
audit paperwork is reviewed for completeness and accuracy by CCHIIM  . If all paperwork is complete and the ap -
propriate number of CEUs are earned, you will be notified that your credential is valid until the next recertifica -
tion due date  . If, after submission of CEUs, it is determined that some CEUs are not applicable, an  
appropriate amount of time will be allowed for you to earn additional replacement CEUs  .
Sunset Credentials
AHIMA no longer offers examination of these sunset credentials, therefore the recertification maintenance is no 
longer required  .
Credential Year Sunset
Physician Coding Specialist (PCS) 2001
Certified in Healthcare Security (CHS) 2007
Certified in Healthcare Privacy (CHP) 2008
Certified in Healthcare Technology Specialist (CHTS) 2018
Certified Professional in Health Informatics (CPHI) 2018
AHIMA Recertification Guide 17Appendix A—HIIM Domains 
HIIM Professional Domain Deﬁnition: HIIM improves the quality of healthcare by ensuring the most timely and 
accurate information is available to make any healthcare decision  . HIIM professionals manage healthcare data and 
information resources  . The profession encompasses services in planning, collecting, aggregating, analyzing, and 
disseminating individual patient and aggregate clinical data  . It serves the following healthcare stakeholders: patients, 
providers, patient care organizations, research and policy agencies, payers, and other healthcare-related entities  .
Eighty (80) percent of all CEUs must be earned within the HIIM Domain, which is divided into the domain areas 
below .
The CCHIIM provides the following list of examples of educational experiences  . These educational experiences 
may include, b ut are not limited to, the following :
Domain I. Data Structure, Content, and Information Governance: 
Data content, structure and standards helps create the framework for an optimal health record and effective 
information exchange between healthcare providers  . This is achieved by establishing clear guidelines for the 
acceptable values, data sources, and how information is technically captured, processed, accessed, archived/
stored, and retrieved for specified data fields  . It focuses on information systems, informatics principles, and 
information technology as it is applied to the continuum of healthcare delivery  .
Examples: 
a .  Principles and applications of classification, taxonomies, nomenclatures, terminologies, clinical 
vocabularies, content related to diagnostic and procedural classification and terminologies, such as:  
ICD-10-CM/PCS, ICD-10-O, ICD-11, CPT, HCPCS, SNOMED, DMS-V, ICF
b .  HIIM Software applications:  Encoders, Groupers, Computer Assisted Coding tools, speech 
recognition, CDI and ROI applications, EHRs
c .  Technology design, architecture, and infrastructure: Cloud technologies, interfaces, encryption, 
firewalls, operating systems, patient and physician portals
d .  Standards:  HL-7, UHDDS, HIPAA
Domain II.  Information Protection: Access, Disclosure, Archival, Privacy and Security 
Establish, evaluate, and maintain policies and protocols for protecting healthcare information to govern systems 
and processes that generate, collect, store, transmit, use, archive, and disposition of data and information  .
Examples:
a .  Healthcare law and regulations and terminology related to access, disclosure, archival, privacy and security
b .  Policy and procedure development, evaluation and maintenance for the following:
• Privacy, security, and confidentiality 
• Record and data access and disclosure management 
• Data security
• Data archiving
• Patient portals
• Release of information
c .  Security and privacy risk assessment, analysis, mitigation and management
d .  E-Discovery
e .  Business continuity planning such as off-site storage, servers and backup systems
f .  Personal health information
AHIMA Recertification Guide 18Domain III.  Informatics, Analytics, and Data Use: 
Defines how health information is manipulated and utilized by the organization and shared to external entities, 
including but not limited to: budgeting projections, long-term service line planning, forecasting healthcare needs 
of an organization’s patient population, resources used, etc  . Data analysis is the process of transforming data into 
information for decision making  .
Examples:
a .  Manipulation of available data 
b . Record tracking
c . Data quality assessment (validity, reliability, completeness, timeliness and accuracy)
d . Data (internal and external) importing and exporting
e . Data exploration and mining
f . Statistical analysis of healthcare data
g . Data display and reports
h .  Data extraction and transmission to internal and external entities (billing, registry reporting, quality 
measure reporting, vital statistics, statewide administrative databases, etc  .)
Domain IV.  Revenue Cycle Management 
Management and oversight of all business, administrative and clinical functions that contribute to patient revenue 
from point of entry through payment and adjudication  . This may include insurance processing, registration, 
eligibility, claims management, billing, collections, and denials  .
Examples:
a .  Payment methodologies and systems
b .  Billing processes and procedures
c .  Bill scrubbers, MCE and NCCI
d .  Local and national coverage determinations 
e .  Insurance models and trends
f .  Interaction with payers (insurance plans)
g .  Appeals and denials management
h .  Revenue collection from patients
i .  Cost reporting, budget variances, budget speculation
j .  Cost benefit analysis
k .  Payer contracting
l .  Case mix management
m .  Value based purchasing programs
n .  Hospital-acquired conditions and POA
o .  Clinical documentation improvement—reimbursement focus
Domain V.  Health Law and Compliance 
The process of establishing an organizational structure that promotes the prevention, detection, and resolution  
of instances of conduct that do not conform to federal, state, or private payer healthcare program requirements  
or the healthcare organization’s ethical and business policies  .
Examples:
a .  Healthcare law and regulations related to coding, clinical documentation, billing and data reporting
b .   Industry endorsed ethics, guidelines and directives related to coding, clinical documentation, billing  
AHIMA Recertification Guide 19and data reporting 
c .   Policy and procedure development, evaluation and maintenance related to billing, coding, clinical 
documentation, and data reporting
d .   Accreditation standards, policies and procedures
e .   Patient safety
f .   Risk management
Domain VI. Organizational Management and Leadership:
Utilizing skills and tools to manage, guide, improve operations, provide innovative solutions based on health 
data, proactively offer knowledge and decision support expertise, and support patient safety and quality initiatives 
which ultimately lead to greater trust and transparency within organizations and healthcare in general  .
Examples:
a . Professional and practice-related ethical issues
b . Managed care operations
c . Negotiation techniques
d . Workflow reengineering, workflow design techniques
e . Leadership development
f . Performance improvement models
g . Training and development
h . Work design
i . Employee hiring and retention
j . Effective communication
k . Managing remote staff and functions
l . Lean management systems
m . Project management
Domain VII.  Clinical Foundations:
Understand human anatomy and physiology; the nature of disease processes; and the protocols of diagnosis 
and treatment of major diseases, to include common drugs and laboratory and other tests used for the diagnosis 
and treatment of disease  . Practice the ability to apply this knowledge to the reading, coding, and abstracting of 
medical information to support quality patient care and associated databases  .
Examples:
a . Medical terminology
b . Anatomy and physiology
c . Pathophysiology
d . Pharmacology
e . Diagnostic and laboratory testing
f . Ancillary services 
g . Telemedicine
h . Medical and surgical procedures
Domain VIII: Evolving Topics/Other HIIM Relevant Topics
Emerging topics that arise as part of the healthcare ecosystem as it transitions to keep pace with new regulations, 
technologies, and other changes in the industry  .
AHIMA Recertification Guide 20Examples:
a . Coding and Revenue Cycle 
b . Risk Adjustment Factor (RAF)
c . Hierarchical Condition Category (HCC)
d . Pay for Performance
e . Informatics (Computer Assisted Technology (CAT)
f . Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resources (FHIR)
g . Unified Medical Language System (UMLS)
h . Artificial Intelligence (AI)
i . Regulations with new technology
AHIMA Recertification Guide 21Change History
Date Change
10/18/2016 Added Recertification Terminology and two-year 
recertification cycle reasoning  . Updated policies: 
changed maximum number of required CEUs to 50, 
changed the two-year recertification cycle start date 
to the day the exam is passed or the day the transcript 
is received, changed CEU calculation to be based 
on increments of 0  .5, added Retired and Voluntarily 
Relinquished statuses, and removed Permanent Waiver 
option  .
10/30/2017 Updated pricing of recertification fees  .
5/9/2018 Updated CEU Requirements for Multiple Credentials 
section example; updated Initial cycle verbiage to 
address anniversary date cycles; changed number of 
CEUs offered for AHIMA exhibits at national or state 
meetings from 1 to 2; updated accepted volunteer 
CEU activity verbiage; updated CEUs received from 
Community of Practice to Engage; removed CEUs for 
taking a HIT Pro exam  .
11/1/18 Revisions
4/30/19 Removed Sunset credentials: CHTS & CPHI
Also removed CHP & CHS
11/20/19 Revisions
1/1/2021 Policy updates for the removal of the grace period and 
self reviews, the retirement and voluntarily relinquish 
process  . CEU extension policy removed, early tester 
policy, and the recertification extension fee  .
