Automa tion in Health Care 
of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology under 
Contract No. HHSP233201600030I/75P00119F37001 
OCTOBER 2022
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 22  Strategies to Advance Automation Priority Areas
 2 4 Conclusion
 2 5 Acknowledgments
 2 6 References
27  Appendix 1 Introduction
 3 Automation Across Industries
 7 Automation Gaps in Health Care
 1 0 A Path Forward for Automated Health Care
 1 5 Priority Areas for Automating Health Care
16 PRIORITY AREA  1 
Mobilize nationwide scalable automation in  
near-term “sprints” and long-term “marathons”
17 PRIORITY AREA  2 
Enable discovery of redundant tasks
18 PRIORITY AREA  3 
Ensure a ready clinician base for workflow automation
19 PRIORITY AREA  4 
Enable all stakeholders to effectively and  
efficiently engage in health and health care tasks
20 PRIORITY AREA  5 
Improve patient and caregiver interactions with  
health and health care
21 PRIORITY AREA  6 
Leverage interoperable health data for automationII
Table of Contents
1
Inefficient workflows continue to slow the delivery of 
health care, forcing providers to spend effort on low-value, manual tasks rather than spending the bulk of their time focused on point-of-care patient interactions. 
A solution may be on the horizon. Rapid technology 
advancement, expanded computing power, and democratized access to information have pushed and accelerated automation across all industries. Automation increases productivity and catalyzes the emergence of new services and products. It also empowers workforces. The increased availability of health IT tools and modern computing provide opportunities to streamline workflow through automation.
Non-health sectors that use automation 
offer insights into how health care processes can be automated effectively to improve health care delivery.Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care
Introduction
Creating a Path Forward for Workflow Automation in Health Care
2
Methodology
This document is prepared by Clinovations Government + Health to present priorities and strategies to 
advance workflow automation in health care using health IT and modern computing. It is based on work completed for ONC including: Priorities to Accelerate Automation in Health Care 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Eight semi-structured 
interviews conducted with 
automation experts  
across multiple industries  
in November and  
December of 2019A targeted literature search 
drawing from sources within 
and outside of health care, 
including peer-reviewed journals, 
gray literature, issue briefs, 
government reports, conference 
proceedings and presentations, 
and web-based materialsA multi-disciplinary expert 
workshop on September 14th 
and 15th, 2020, to provide 
input on topics for workflow 
automation in health carePriorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care  
INTRODUCTION
3
Health care delivery involves a series of interconnected clinical, 
administrative, and population-level workflows that impact patients, caregivers, clinicians, and the staff that support health delivery.
These workflows occur throughout the treatment process, including 
times when the health care delivery process leaves the four walls of a provider. These workflows appear everywhere and can speed up or slow down the process, depending on their efficiency.
 
Definition of Workflow AutomationWorkflow Automation as a Driver Across Industries
Modern computing has created opportunities for 
automation across industries, leveraging the Internet of Things and Industry 4.0. It is time for the health care industry to benefit from automation on a larger scale.
+3 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care
Automation Across Industries
WORKFLOW
The sequence of 
physical and mental 
tasks performed by 
various people within 
and between work 
environments1 WORKFLOW AUTOMATION
Involves identifying 
redundant, manual tasks to 
streamline processes using 
technology and modern 
computing to provide valueAUTOMATION
The creation and 
application of technology 
to monitor and control  
the delivery of products 
and services2 Internet of Things (IoT)
A concept that describes 
connecting anything that can be connected and streamlining processes for personal and commercial betterment. It is a movement to advance every-day device connectivity, via the internet, to form a system and network of linked and coordinated devices that send and receive data for efficiency gains.
3 Industry 4.0
Rapid and widespread digitization across industries, based on dramatic increases in the availability of data, computational power, and connectivity in parallel to innovations in analytics and business-intelligence capabilities and technology that facilitate human-machine interaction.
4,5 =
AUTOMATION ACROSS INDUSTRIES4
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Examples of Industries 
Benefiting from Workflow Automation
Health care can learn from the 
automation work occurring 
across industries that has led to real benefits and cost savings.
6 Industry Workflow Automation Examples
Aviation• Autonomous and assisted flying
• Flight patterns and flight crew scheduling
Financial 
Services  
and Banking• Management of monetary accounts and data 
• Customer profiles for personalized services
• Accounting and document routing
Hospitality• Housing needs and staffing levels management
• Capacity level analysis and forecasting
• Hotel or entertainment experience personalization
Manufacturing• Workforce planning, resource scheduling, and assembly line 
management and flow
• Local, regional, and international production and distribution
Transportation 
and Travel• Ride sharing/hailing
• Notifications for expected and unexpected occurrences
Wastewater  
Treatment• Plant operations and staffing
• Water and material monitoring 
AUTOMATION ACROSS INDUSTRIES5
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Harnessing the Benefits of Workflow 
Automation for Health Care
CAQH Study Provides Insight 
into Projected Cost BenefitsLeveraging workflow automation allows 
for technology to manage repetitive 
tasks in a way that saves time, increases 
efficiency and accuracy, and saves 
money. Workflow automation directly 
tackles some of the most significant 
challenges in health care today.
In a recent study, the Council for Affordable Quality Healthcare (CAQH) 
found the health care industry could save $13.3 billion if eight administrative 
tasks in the revenue cycle were no 
longer completed manually.
7
Revenue cycle automation is one of the many applications where workflow 
automation can play a pivotal role.Inefficient 
WorkflowsHigh Costs 
Variable Quality Poor Outcomes
This data shows eight 
common administrative 
tasks and their cost for 
the health care industry 
per transaction.Prior authorization
Claim status inquiryEligibility and benefit 
verification
AttachmentsClaim submission Remittance adviceClaim paymentCoordination of 
benefits$14.24
$8.77
$3.18$10.13
$4.22$4.22$5.06
$1.055
AUTOMATION ACROSS INDUSTRIES6
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
The Opportunity to Apply Workflow 
Automation in Health Care
Progress Requires Multi-Stakeholder InvolvementSuccessful workflow automation design and 
implementation depends on collaboration across multiple stakeholders.
Stakeholder
Clinicians
Patients & CaregiversTechnology Vendors
Researchers and Leaders 
in Non-Health Care Fields Goal
Understand the promise and value of automation to reduce 
administrative burdens.
Learn about automation as a tool to increase access to 
information, improve care coordination, and expand opportunities to contribute to decision making.
Understand opportunities to accelerate automation  
development and innovation.
Connect automation needs and opportunities in health care to 
lessons learned from other industries and disciplines.Sample Call to Action
Collaborate in strategic planning for automation and workflows. 
Voice the needs of patients and caregivers in 
conversations about workflow automation to  
aid in automation selection and design.
Support instrumentation and evolution 
of technology and standards to support automation.
Contribute to strategies that advance 
automation priorities through thought leadership, research, and evaluation.
7 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Automation Gaps 
in Health Care   
Automation has already been leveraged in 
some areas of health care, but the industry is not nearly as automated as it could be. 
Automation has occurred in some administrative 
and operational areas, but workflows involving human judgment and decision-making have experienced less automation. 
Workflow automation can support 
clinical and non-clinical stakeholders in care delivery by supporting 
performance on cognitive tasks.Leveraging automation in health care will:
Reduce unnecessary variance  by 
standardizing workflows, where appropriate, 
across specialties, practices, and regions
Increase access to health care services  
by streamlining physical and administrative 
barriers to care
Improve safety and health care 
outcomes by increasing adherence to 
safety protocols based on evidence and 
reducing opportunities for human error 
Help clinical and non-clinical health 
care workers improve productivity by removing repetitive tasks, increasing time 
spent on care and care management7
AUTOMATION GAPS IN HEALTH CARE8 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Health care is different.  
The solutions also need to be different.
While other industries have leveraged automation, the health care industry features several differentiating factors 
that have led to slower adoption. These differences must be factored into automation design and implementation.
Variation of Health Care Delivery 
Across Specialties, Practices,  
and Regions
The distribution and non-
standardization of health care delivery 
makes automation difficult to scale.
Complex Data & Standards
Complexity of underlying data  
and standards to describe and  
share health information vary  
between systems.
Financial Transparency
Financing and price transparency 
in the health care system leads to 
unclear incentives for investing in 
automation.Provider/Patient Relationship
The provider-patient relationship 
shapes the human experience of 
care delivery, and patients must trust the people delivering care and any 
automation that may support them. 
Factors Impacting Health
Health outcomes are affected by 
factors outside of the health care 
delivery system, such as social determinants of health and the 
environment.8
Co-Produced Care
Health care providers, patients, 
and other actors contribute to a 
“co-produced service” involving coordination, communication, and 
commitment to an intended health 
goal or status.
Privacy & Security
Protecting patient privacy and data 
security is a firmly entrenched principle in the U.S. health care 
system, and health data must be 
kept secure at all points.
9
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Building Blocks for Automation
The U.S. health care system is complex and nuanced. Successful approaches to workflow 
automation will align with the realities of care delivery to augment provider care delivery.9
Lessons Learned 
from Other IndustriesThorough PlanningExecute a progressive set 
of strategies to support automation priorities.
Patient at 
the CenterInclude a broad 
stakeholder base that includes and prioritizes patients and caregivers.Look to lessons learned from  
non-health care industries with similar challenges or constraints.AUTOMATION GAPS IN HEALTH CARE
10 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 10
The use of modern computing 
is needed to increase efficiency, improve health outcomes, and deliver value for stakeholders.Achieving Greater Automation
Modern Technology
Automate workflows using modern 
computing approaches, such as 
artificial intelligence and machine 
learning, big data analytics, natural 
language processing, robotics, and wearable sensors.
Look Forward
Research areas that cannot yet be automated and investigate options for addressing them more effectively.
Dependable Data
Stakeholders should be able to trust the information generated in automated workflows, as well as the data that supports automated health workflows.Improve Care
Enable safe, secure, and effective care across populations using automation.Focus on Patients/Caregivers
Improve care experience for patients and caregivers using automation to streamline processes and free clinicians’ time to focus on 
patient needs.
Integrate People
Ensure people are integrated 
into processes alongside the machines, technology, and data needed to perform cognitive tasks.A Path 
Forward for 
Automated Health Care
A PATH FORWARD FOR AUTOMATED HEALTH CARE11 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Technology is a tool that 
supports automation.
Technology supports automation when 
it is flexible, interoperable, reusable, and scalable. 
Development and implementation 
requires input from interdisciplinary teams and user-centered design for a variety of users. Artificial 
IntelligenceBig Data 
AnalyticsMachine 
Learning
Natural Language 
ProcessingRobotics Wearable 
Sensors11
Examples of Modern 
Computing Technologies
12 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
People, Process, and Technology Factors for Automation
Workflow Selection Criteria Automation Approaches Implementation Barriers
People
Stakeholders affected by 
workflow automation• Degree of human  intervention required• Stakeholder engagement
• Role-based training development• User concerns and complexity perceptions
• Lack of multi-disciplinary input
Process
How tasks are conducted and relate to organizational 
structure• Repetition of simple tasks
• Clear roles and 
responsibilities• Current and future state mapping
• Constraint and  dependency identification• Lack of definition, consistency,  and agreement
• Poorly modeled workflow
Technology
Tools that support automation• Available tools for low, semi, or full automation• Technology selection for workflows to automate
• Integration with other technology• Lack of interoperability and scalability
• Poor integration of existing  
systems and data
• Lack of standards and “messy” data12
A PATH FORWARD FOR AUTOMATED HEALTH CARE
The path to workflow automation must address who is involved in workflows, their needs, 
and how automation might change their work.6,8 
Semi-  Automated Fully  -Automated Low  Automation
•  Manual tasks repeat infrequently
•  Roles and responsibilities shift  and 
are not well-defined
•  Human cognition and/or intervention 
required often
•  Low sophistication for technology•  Some manual tasks repeat
•  Some roles and responsibilities are 
well-defined
•  Human intervention is defined  for 
specific tasks
•  Technical sophistication increases•  Manual tasks repeat frequently •  Roles and responsibilities are concrete 
and well-defined
•  Tasks are simple and clear
•  Technology and analytics are  advanced13
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Workflow Characteristics Drive Level of Automation
Workflows with characteristics that promote automation may be suitable for full levels of automation, such as 
those with a high degree of manual tasks, high frequency and repetition, and clearly defined roles. W orkflows 
with characteristics that challenge automation may be suitable for lower degrees of automation, such as those with inconsistently followed rules and unclear roles.
6,8
Based on the workflow and the level of automation, select the appropriate technology .A PATH FORWARD FOR AUTOMATED HEALTH CARE
 
 
See Appendix for additional examples and descriptions14
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Examples of Workflows that Could Be Automated
Processes to 
identify, document, and report adverse eventsSteps to monitor, communicate, and engage with groups of individualsManual abstraction,  calculation, and transmission of quality, safety, and public health dataMachine-based and manual data collection, analysis, and displayPatient-level care and navigation activitiesBUSINESS FUNCTIONS CARE & MANAGEMENTA PATH FORWARD FOR AUTOMATED HEALTH CARE
Treatment and  
Care DeliveryPopulation Health Surveillance Reporting AnalyticsAdministrative Operational
The processes that support the operational, business functions of health care delivery
15 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Priority Areas 
for Health Care Automation
Six priority areas have been identified for health 
care that can improve workflow automation. The priority areas include a set of strategies recommended to support a planned and gradual transformation of health care workflows.
The goal is to use automation to 
improve the health care experience 
for patients, clinicians, and the 
organizations delivering care.The priority areas are designed to address an ecosystem of 
organizations and individual stakeholders – including clinicians, health care staff, patients, and caregivers, as well as the 
technology that must collectively support automation to achieve 
the vision of increased efficiency, improved health outcomes, and value for all stakeholders.Mobilize nationwide, 
scalable automation in near-term “sprints” and long-term “marathons”
Enable all stakeholders to effectively and efficiently engage in health and health care tasks
Enable discovery  of redundant tasksEnsure a ready clinician base  for workflow automation
Leverage interoperable health data for automationPRIORITIES
Ensure automation improves patient and caregiver interaction with health and health care15
GOALS
• Identify smaller, feasible automation opportunities that can 
be implemented rapidly where numerous stakeholders benefit in the near-term
• Plan longer-term efforts that fully automate entire processes
• Use technologies that easily can be plugged into an electronic ecosystem, regardless of the size, type, and sophistication of an organization’s technology16
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
PRIORITY AREA 1
Mobilize Nationwide Scalable 
Automation in Near-Term “Sprints” and Long-Term “Marathons”
Stakeholder-driven priorities and desired results should drive 
workflow automation initiatives, which in turn should guide the selection of the appropriate technology. Automation that affects many stakeholders and involves overlapping workflows requires long-term planning, but existing technologies and approaches used in non-health care industries can be applied to less complex processes now. Automation designed around a single technology or applied to a narrowly defined workflow may not achieve widescale application or scale across multiple organizations with varying people and technology resources.
START with the sprint. BUILD to the marathon.  
Don’t wait to address all aspects of automation to get started. TARGET END STATE
The health care industry aligns to pursue automation 
for widespread gains.
PRIORITY AREAS FOR HEALTH CARE AUTOMATION
17
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
PRIORITY AREA 2
Enable Discovery  
of Redundant Tasks
Supporting workflow automation may involve adopting a new 
operational mindset for many health care delivery organizations. Identifying tasks for automation requires pinpointing inefficient tasks and reimagining them with modern computing applications. The health care industry can look at other business sectors to help determine existing workflows that can be improved through new automation tasks.GOALS
• Create an operational routine and culture of identifying 
workflows to automate across health care organizations
• Promote a workforce with the skills needed to analyze existing workflows and data, design and implement automation, and conduct ongoing monitoring and optimization
• Scale automation initiatives across health care organizations in a manner that supports organizations of different sizes, resources, and patient population
FIND the redundant, wasteful tasks and AUTOMATE them. TARGET END STATE
Organizations independently identify automation 
opportunities.PRIORITY AREAS FOR HEALTH CARE AUTOMATION
18
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
PRIORITY AREA 3
Ensure a Ready Clinician Base for 
Workflow Automation
The adoption of health IT has created opportunities to 
leverage data to improve patient care, but sometimes increased data can contribute to clinician burden. Properly designed automation can save clinicians time on repetitive tasks like inbox monitoring or gathering information stored across disparate sources. Automation design must involve input from clinicians to find these burdensome tasks so they can spend more time on treating patients.• Reinvigorate the joy of practice by designing automation that 
supports cognitive tasks and patient interaction
• Improve situational awareness for care management by identifying and filling data blind spots to provide person-centered care
• Uphold strict and high levels of data security and patient safety 
• Streamline data collection, review, and translation for patient care and population healthGOALS
FROM WEAR TO CARE: Clinicians focus on health with efficient workflows and data. TARGET END STATE
Clinicians embrace automation to relieve 
workflow burden.PRIORITY AREAS FOR HEALTH CARE AUTOMATION
19
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
PRIORITY AREA 4
Enable All Stakeholders to 
Effectively and Efficiently Engage in Health and Health Care Tasks
• Simplify redundant data entry at multiple points within and 
across health care encounters
• Eliminate “hunting and gathering” data across multiple platforms by enabling easy access to information for use in decision making
• Present complete, accurate data for workflows through tools that streamline care management
• Improve feedback and status monitoring across the continuum of care and across settingsGOALS
Focus on HIGH-V ALUE work. Not repetitive or menial tasks. Health care stakeholders interact with many technologies and 
data sources. Automation can remove burden for tasks with clear roles and responsibilities that involve manual data entry, high frequency, and repetition. Automation should facilitate people working alongside machines, technology, and data to support administrative and operational business processes to improve the health care management of patients.   TARGET END STATE
Individuals’ time shifts from repetitive to cognitive 
tasks of managing and supporting care.PRIORITY AREAS FOR HEALTH CARE AUTOMATION
20
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
PRIORITY AREA 5
Improve Patient and Caregiver 
Interactions with Health and Health Care
Patients and caregivers need automation to more seamlessly 
manage health and wellness anywhere and anytime. Automation must remove administrative tasks that create burden, such as: appointment making, check-in and registration; accessing portals and applications; data sharing and gathering; connecting to community and social resources. Automation can elevate the patient and caregiver role in decision making and improve access to care, but privacy and data security must be prioritized in the creation and implementation of new tools and systems.• Streamline information and data sharing across patients, 
caregivers, clinicians, staff (provider and payer), and other stakeholders involved in health care workflows
• Simplify administrative tasks such as appointments, registration, portals, and applications for health data access
• Empower patients to manage health by facilitating faster access to needed information
• Improve care access and outcomes by reducing barriers, allowing care to be managed anytime and anywhereGOALS
Use technology to REDUCE FRUSTRATION for patients and caregivers through EASY ACCESS to information.TARGET END STATE
Patients and caregivers have a more seamless and 
integrated experience in health and health care management.PRIORITY AREAS FOR HEALTH CARE AUTOMATION
21
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
PRIORITY AREA 6
Leverage Interoperable 
Data for Automation
• Streamline health information exchange workflows
• Improve situational awareness for care management by 
finding, parsing, and presenting data across multiple systems (relates to missing data, stage of wellness/care for the patient)
• Reduce use of paper forms and processes that require multiple inputs of clinical and administrative information 
• Integrate clinician and patient workflows by bringing information, communication, and care into harmony GOALSTARGET END STATE
Data shared across disparate technologies 
delivers insights and efficiencies.
Reliable, accurate, comprehensive data is essential for 
workflow automation. Data must be accessible via standardized interfaces and other interoperable methods to integrate modern computing technologies into workflow automation. Workflow automation holds the greatest promise when it utilizes and shares data across health care delivery organizations to drive widescale improvements. The design must focus on interoperability, taking into account technological disparities in underserved and rural areas.
There is a lot of health data. SHARE IT and USE IT. PRIORITY AREAS FOR HEALTH CARE AUTOMATION
22 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Six sequential strategies to advance the priorities and vision  
for workflow automation:
These strategies illustrate how people, process, and technology must 
synchronously orchestrate and mobilize to realize the workflow automation vision.Educate Prioritize Incent Convene Demonstrate Scale22
Strategies to Advance  
Automation Priority Areas
1
5
4
6
3
223 Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Educate
Focuses on spreading 
awareness of the need and 
opportunity to automate, 
identifying and addressing 
barriers to automation 
(including concerns about privacy and security, and job 
loss or reassignment).
Incent
Focuses on the design and 
deployment of appropriate policy 
and market levers tailored to the 
people, process, and technology 
that support workflow automation. 
Occurs in coordination with payers and should include all stakeholders, 
even if they have conflicting goals.Demonstrate
Focuses on the design of pilot 
projects, demonstrations, and 
evaluations to determine the 
success and scalability of 
prioritized workflows. It should 
consider the effect on health outcomes and access across 
populations.Scale
Uses automation tools and 
processes to implement 
and conduct continuous 
improvement in automation at 
organizations across the U.S.23
Prioritize
Identifies workflows to automate and 
their appropriate level of automation. 
Prioritize automation for workflows 
for tasks that include manual data 
entry, a high frequency of repetition, 
clearly defined independent and dependent variables for models, and 
clear roles and responsibilities.Convene
Builds national dialogue 
about workflow automation by 
gathering more stakeholders 
into the process to support the 
next strategy for prioritization. 
This is an opportunity to gain input and consensus on 
measurable goals to achieve 
through automation.
Strategies to Advance Automation Priority Areas
24
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Workflow automation has the ability 
to  directly address many of the largest  challenges in health care today, among  them the cost, quality, and safety of health  care, as well as mounting provider burnout.
But automation will not be achieved  
overnight. It requires a deliberate process  predicated on short-term gains to show  value, combined with a longer-term vision  to reach the full potential for health care  workflow automation.Automation holds tremendous potential to 
drive efficiency in health care delivery in the United States, particularly where manual, repetitive tasks burden current workflows. 
Identifying a set of priorities and strategies 
for advancing workflow automation in health care that multiple stakeholders can adopt and promote can help accelerate improvements in the quality and safety. By helping to identify the ideal end state, the industry can work collaboratively together to achieve it.24
For more information about ONC’s work in health care automation, visit  
https://www.healthit.gov/topic/scientific-initiatives/health-information-technology-workflow-automation-policy-development . Conclusion
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 25
Acknowledgments
The authors of this report are: 
• Anita Samarth, CEO, Clinovations Government + Health
• Nicole Kemper, MPH, Vice President, Clinovations Government + Health
The reviewers and contributors from the Office the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) are:
• Steven Posnack, MS, MHS, Deputy National Coordinator for Health Information Technology
• Tracy Okubo, CSM, PMP, Program Analyst
The original ONC project directors, whose leadership and expertise drove the vision, are: 
• Don Rucker, MD, MBA, MS, Adjunct Professor of Emergency Medicine, Ohio State University, Wexner Medical Center
• Teresa Zayas Cabán, PhD, Assistant Director for Policy Development, National Library of Medicine, National Institutes of 
Health
The authors would like to also like to thank Saira Haque, PhD, and R TI International, for contributions throughout this project, as 
well as the participants of the Workflow Automation Workshop for their thought leadership and insights.
26
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
References
1 Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality . What is workflow? AHRQ. https://digital.ahrq.gov/health-it-tools-and-resources/
evaluation-resources/workflow-assessment-health-it-toolkit/workflow . Accessed July 7, 2020.
2 International Society of Automation. What is automation? ISA. https://www.isa.org/about-isa/what-is-automation/ .  
Accessed July 7, 2020.
3 Baur C, Wee D. Manufacturing’ s next act. McKinsey. https://www.mckinsey.com/business-functions/operations/our-insights/
manufacturings-next-act . Published June 2015. Accessed February 26, 2020.
4 Lapão LV . The future impact of healthcare services digitalization on health workforce: the increasing role of medical informatics. 
Studies in Health Technology & Informatics. 2016;228:675-79.
5 Meola A. What is the Internet of Things? What IoT means and how it works. Business Insider. https://www.businessinsider.com/
internet-of-things-definition . Published May 10, 2018. Accessed February 26, 2020.
6 HealthIT.gov . Health IT Workflow Automation: Industry Lessons for Health Care.
7 2020 CAQH Index® Closing the Gap: The Industry Continues to Improve, But Opportunities for Automation Remain .
8 Zayas Cabán T , Haque S, Kemper N. Identifying Opportunities for Workflow Automation in Health Care: Lessons Learned from Other 
Industries. Applied Clinical Informatics (forthcoming).  
9 HealthIT.gov . Health IT Workflow Automation: Workshop Summary Report.
27
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Appendix
Workflow Rationale 
Management of 
permissions to access and share electronic health data• Enable patients and caregivers to more quickly access their data and control its transfer to third party apps and other 
providers without relying on care providers and paper-based systems
• Empower patients and caregivers to be active participants in their care and verify provider data
• Level of automation to consider: High
Post-encounter care 
coordination• Ensure care management and monitoring processes are immediately underway after ambulatory and inpatient encounters 
to improve health outcomes
• Connect patients and caregivers with advocates and community and non-clinical resources for social needs
• Level of automation to consider: High to semi-automated
Care planning • Facilitate information sharing, communication, data verification, and decision-making with care teams
• Level of automation to consider: Semi-automated
Billing and payment 
processes• Streamline, simplify, and bring transparency to costs from providers and payers
• Level of automation to consider: High
Customer service bots • Reduce burden on providers and administrative staff for scheduling and other tasks that support care delivery
• Provide digestible information in patient friendly terms and venues
• Level of automation to consider: High
Preferences applied across automated workflows • Improve patient experience 
• Ensure critical messages are received, understood, and acted upon
• Level of automation to consider: HighExhibit 1 – Patient and Caregiver Workflows To Consider for Automation9 
28
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Exhibit 2 – Clinical and Care Delivery Workflows To Consider for Automation
Workflow Rationale 
Telehealth and virtual health • Extend remote monitoring across the care spectrum
• Transform care delivery across settings with monitors and alerts that notify patients, caregivers, and their 
providers of an appropriate visit based on wearables, sensors, and other available technologies
• Use bots to schedule and onboard patients to virtual health platforms, such as apps 
Inpatient and outpatient decision 
making workflows • Streamline data collection, review, and translation into practice (for example, synthesizing more than 20 
parameters for starting extubation)
• Reduce “hunter/gatherer” burden on clinicians to locate missing data to support real-time care decisions 
Encounter follow-up tracking • Streamline follow-up schedules for clinical reminders to eliminate reliance on work-arounds, such as Excel spreadsheets for procedure reminders, that reside outside the EHR
Inbox triage • Reduce inbox monitoring by assigning messages to appropriate care team members and administrative staff and tracking their responses 
Scheduling • Improve appointment scheduling to better understand and respond to condition severity and requests for medical records prior to scheduling
Care team member collaboration 
and communication• Reduce duplicative information gathering by streamlining check-in, registration, and rooming processes APPENDIX
29
Priorities to Accelerate Workflow Automation in Health Care 
Exhibit 3 – Population Health Workflows To Consider for Automation
Workflow Rationale 
“Define” the patient • Enable care providers and delivery organizations to understand “data blind spots” and provide “life-
focused” care
• Facilitate widespread availability of sophisticated population health analytics tools and data
Streamline interoperability 
with non-clinical data sets (for example, schools and the justice system)• In support of the workflow detailed above, provide innovative ways to advance understanding of social 
determinants of care
• Exploit workflow models to understand precision data requirement for interoperability (what and where).
Advance use of customer 
relationship management for communication, information gathering, and identify verification• Reduce use of paper forms and processes that require providing the same administrative and/or clinical 
information multiple times
• Consistently collect and support use of information regarding patients’  communication needs and 
preferences, such as primary language or method of contact 
Reporting registry, public health, 
and quality measurement data • Reduce manual burden associated with report development, generation, and transmission
• Decrease length of time to share public health and quality measurement dataAPPENDIX
