Page 1  April 2023 / Vol. 28  
STEAM  
NEWSLETTER  
THE OFFICIAL NEWSLETTER FOR THE ILLINOIS DEPARTMENT OF 
INNOVATION & TECHNOLOGY (DoIT) STEAM EDUCATION GROUP  
Celebrate Innovation & Technology Month  
Governor JB Pritzker has proclaimed April 2023 as Innovation and Technology Month  
in Illinois. This recognition provides a time to celebrate the significant contributions 
that technology and innovation make to the state's economy and society. The month is 
marked by a series of events and workshops that showcase the latest advancements 
and encourage collaboration between industry leaders, entrepreneurs, and innova-
tors. It is an opportunity to recognize the state's thriving tech ecosystem and support 
the growth of technology -related programs, businesses, and startups.  
  
The increasing daily influence in the use of artificial intelligence offers one example of 
the integral role education can play to build an environment that fosters development 
and responsible use.  We encourage you to explore the resources and events such as 
those included in this volume and engage in discussions about technology innovation 
in your region.  
  
The second World Quantum Day  will be celebrated on April 14, 2023, and National 
Quantum Coordination Office  (NQCO) offers four ways to engage in World Quantum 
Day activities. The National Q -12 Education Partnership  has developed informal and 
formal learning opportunities for Quantum Information Science and Engineering 
(QISE) learning .  Q-12 created “This is Quantum ,” a marquee video made for World 
Quantum Day 2022, but is timeless and can be shared again for 2023. A recording and 
slides created in 2022 to introduce quantum information science and Quantum Re-
sources are available on the DoIT STEAM Quantum website .  
Page 2  
• K - 4 
Climate Kids | What's the difference between weather and climate?  
• 5 - 8 
NASA -JPL | NASA Space Voyagers: The Game  
• 9 - 12 
TeachEngineering | Design Step 1: Identify the Need  
STEAM resources for in -person, hybrid, remote learning, and  
professional development  
• cK-12 | Adaptive Practice  
• DoIT | Quantum Illinois  
• National Q -12 Education Partnership | QISE Education Resources and Tools  
• NASA | Classroom Combo: Spacesuit Science (Pressure)  
• Smithsonian | Lights Out  
• UIC | AI on the edge  
• U of I - NCSA | Center for Artificial Intelligence Innovation  
• U of I | Artificial Intelligence for Future Agricultural Resilience, Management, and 
Sustainability Institute   
• U of I - Computer Science | Artificial Intelligence  
• aiEDU | Intro to AI  
• ISTE | Artificial Intelligence in Education  
• NASA JPL | 18 Ways NASA Uses Pi  
• ReadWriteThink.org | Teaching with Technology  
• UIUC College of Education | How will Artificial Intelligence (AI) Power New Learning 
in Education?  
Page 3  
Understanding the UN Report on Ozone Layer Recovery  
“The ozone layer is slowly restoring itself and is ex-
pected to be on par with 1980 levels by 2066, according 
to a United Nations assessment  of the goals set forth in 
the Montreal Protocol released this month.  
Ozone is a naturally occurring gas comprising three oxy-
gen atoms. The stratospheric ozone layer is essential in 
protecting humans and the environment from the harm-
ful ultraviolet light from the sun. ” 
NASA: A Future Aircraft Design, Supercomputed  
“No, it ’s not hypermodern art. This image, generated 
by NASA ’s high -performance computers, shows a 
Transonic Truss Braced Wing (TTBW) aircraft con-
cept being tested in a virtual wind tunnel, showing 
how its wings interact with the air around them.  
In this case, the dark red area along the front of the wing represents higher -speed 
airflow as the TTBW ’s wings, which are thinner than those of today ’s commercial 
airliners, pierce the air... In flight, it could consume  up to 10% less jet fuel  than a 
standard airliner. ” 
Illinois Tech: GPT -4 Passes the Bar Exam  
“Daniel Martin Katz, law professor at 
Illinois Tech ’s Chicago -Kent College of 
Law, demonstrates that OpenAI ’s lat-
est deep learning model excels in 
complex legal reasoning and has pro-
found implications for the legal sys-
tem … In a period of roughly four 
years, the leading large language 
model family (GPT) has progressed 
from zero percent on the Multistate 
Bar Exam for GPT -2 to nearly 76 percent on the Multistate Bar Exam in GPT -4.” 

   
 
 
 
 
 
Page 4  
Thu. March 30 | 6 pm - 8 pm  | Rochester High School  
Central Illinois STEM Fair  
“This free regional event is open to students grades K -12, their families, teach-
ers, and school administrators from all schools throughout central Illinois (not 
just Rochester). Admission is free, but tickets are required .” 
Fri. March 31 - Sat. April 1 | 9 am - 4 pm  | UIUC, Champaign  
Engineering Open House: The Future, Today  
“To our visitors we hope that EOH provides an outlet for everyone 
to explore engineering and STEM related fields. This year we wel-
come 200+ exhibits to EOH ranging from drone demonstrations to 
prosthetic hands and a wind tunnel demo. ” 
Application Due | Sat. April 1  
Students for Innovation: Advocacy Day  
“Students are selected through an ap-
plication process to present in -person 
their innovative progress during a 
one-day event at the Illinois State 
Capitol in Springfield.  We encourage 
all schools throughout Illinois to apply (Space is limited). Applications are 
due April 1, 2023. ” 
Tue. April 4 | 3:30 pm - 4:30 pm | Online  
CS & STEM Networking Meeting  
“Teachers, administrators, and curriculum stakeholders are invited to at-
tend, as well CS & STEM educators of all experience levels and at all grade 
levels. Whether you ’re just starting out or interested in taking your district ’s 
CS & STEM program to the next level, this networking group will help you 
achieve your goals. ” 

 
  
 
 
 
Page 5  
Wed. April 5 | 8:45 am - 3:20 pm | Online   
6th Illinois Health Data Analytics Summit   
“This virtual platform will bring leaders in healthcare, medicine, science, 
and business together to discuss the latest AI and machine learning trends 
in Healthcare. This year, we will focus on applications of rapidly emerging 
Generative Models and investigate how they can be leveraged to synthesize 
increasingly realistic and useful electronic health record (EHR) data, includ-
ing images, sounds, and videos. We will discuss various deep generative 
model frameworks, their applications, and the risk of generative AI and its 
potential positive economic impact in accelerating healthcare -related pre-
dictive model development. ” 
Thu. April 6 | 5 pm - 6:30 pm  | DeKalb Public Library  
Teen STEM Café: Entrepreneurship, Innovation and 
Engineering Design   
“Learn about innovation in the fields of toy design and candy making... At our 
monthly Teen STEM Cafe s, we have short talks about STEM fields, related 
STEM activities and FREE Pizza from Hy -Vee! Family members are welcome. ” 
Tue. April 11 | 7 pm - 8 pm | Online  
Life Support: What the International Space Station Teaches 
Us About Our Changing Earth (Exploring Space Lecture)   
“In several decades of continuous presence on the International Space Sta-
tion, we have learned surprising things about the engineering of systems 
that support human life … Spaceflight gives us the opportunity to under-
stand climate change and mitigate its effects to improve the resilience of 
communities on our home planet. ” 

  
 
 
 
 
Page 6  
Tue. April 11 | 3 pm - 4 pm | Online  
Using Rockets to Investigate Forces and Motion | 
Cultivating Learning   
“With the launch of the Artemis missions, student interest in rocketry and 
space exploration is steadily growing. Looking for curricular connections to 
rocketry but aren ’t sure where to begin? Join educators from the National Air 
and Space Museum to explore a variety of ways to use rocketry to teach your 
students about forces and motion.  Participants will explore the How Things 
Fly website, learn about rocketry activities for a variety of grade and skill lev-
els, and build their own simple straw rocket. Leave with ready -to-use activi-
ties and resources and suggestions for scalability and adding technology. ” 
Wed. April 12 | 6 pm - 7:30 pm  | UIS Student Union  
Ethical Artificial Intelligence:  An Industry Perspective   
“In this talk we will discuss different conceptions of Ethi-
cal AI from the perspective of these parties.   In particular, 
we will look at risks associated with algorithmic decision 
making, the practical tradeoffs between performance and explainability, and 
how those risks and tradeoffs impact people as we work towards understand-
ing ethical AI as a stochastic process. ” 
Wed. April 12 | 6:30 pm - 8:30 pm  | DeKalb, IL   
STEM Café: Why an Acre Matters: How Digital 
Technology is Transforming Agriculture   
“Hear from a John Deere product manager and an engineering manager to 
learn about the development of precision digital technology over the past 
two decades. Learn how new technologies, such as autonomous tractors, 
weed -targeting computers and precision fertilizer applicators, are helping 
farmers get better results while using fewer chemicals, helping to reshape 
America ’s acres. ” 

 
  
 
 
 
Page 7  
Fri. April 14 | 9 am - 1 pm  | Chicago  
Student Research Showcase  
“The 5th Annual Student Research Showcase celebrates 30 students as they 
share their mentorship experience and innovative research through the 
Mentor Matching Engine.  During the 2022 -23 school year, students across 
the state of Illinois have identified research questions in a variety of fields 
including STEM, Social Sciences, Arts, Humanities, and more. In partnership 
with professional mentors on the Mentor Matching Engine, they have devel-
oped their ideas, refined their skills, and created innovative solutions. Join 
ISTC Education in person to celebrate our students! ” 
Fri. April 14 | 4 pm - 6:30 pm  | Materials Research Laboratory, Urbana  
World Quantum Day   
“Join the Illinois Quantum Information Science and Technology Center  
(IQUIST) for an evening filled with quantum information science -based activi-
ties and events. ” “This is Quantum  is a marquee video made by the  National Q -
12 Education Partnership  for World Quantum Day 2022, but is timeless and can 
be shared again for 2023 and beyond. ” Additional resources can be found here. 
The educational webinar “What is quantum science and why should I care? ” 
hosted by DoIT recording and slides from 2022 can be found here.  
Fri. April 14 | 9 am - 9:30 am | Online   
Flights of Fancy Story Time: Hare and Tortoise Race to the 
Moon by Oliver J. Corwin   
“Join us for Oliver J. Corwin ’s twist on the classic tale as Hare and Tortoise to 
the Moon with rockets! Take a closer look at examples of rockets that have 
been built for different purposes and then create your own rocket design. ” 

  
 
 
 
 
Page 8  
Apply by Mon. April 17   
The Genes in Space Journey | 2023 Contest  
The Challenge:  
“Students in grades 7 through 12: design DNA experiments that address a 
challenge in space exploration.  
Life on Earth has evolved under the effects of our gravity and the protection 
of our atmosphere. Human space exploration opens up amazing new oppor-
tunities for life, and serious challenges too. ” 
Tue. April 18 | 5:45 pm - 7:45 pm | Online  
The Sun: Front and Center - A Grand Tour of the Solar System   
“The Sun, the 4.5 -billion -year -old star at the center of the solar system, is the 
glue that holds it together, and its activity provides a protective bubble that 
shields the planets from damaging galactic radiation. Astrophysicist and cos-
mologist  Hakeem Oluseyi  shines a light on this special star. ” 
Wed. April 19 | 2 pm - 7 pm  | IA TP , Springfield  
Illinois Assistive Technology Program Open House  
“Join us for an Open House to visit with staff, see a wide array of Assistive 
Technology (AT) devices, and learn more about our new programs and ex-
isting services.  
Tour our new building and visit our:  
• Expanded Demonstration Center  
• Interactive Smart Home  
• Accessible Tech Kitchen  
• IATP Makers Fabrication Lab  
To help us with our planning, please R.S.V.P. by calling (217) 522 -7985 or 
email  iatp@iltech.org .” 

 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 9  
Thu. April 20 | 1 pm - 4 pm | Streamed Online  
Innovation Day  
Listen to stakeholders in Illinois celebrate Illinois innovation and engage in a 
statewide policy discussion around emerging technology that will cultivate 
curiosity and leverage investments. Through discussions on topics such as ar-
tificial intelligence and quantum computing, you can learn more about the 
next steps on ways to strengthen development and pipelines in science, tech-
nology, engineering, arts, and math.  
Fri. April 21 | 9 am - 5:30 pm  |  
Northwestern Pritzker School of Law, Chicago  
IMPACT Series: How ChatGPT and Generative AI Will 
Change Legal Services  
“Introducing a new joint Executive Education series created by Northwestern 
Pritzker School of Law and McCormick School of Engineering designed to 
help law firm leaders, lawyers, and other legal professionals understand and 
make the most of the computational technologies that are transforming the 
delivery of legal services. ” 
Sat. April 22  | Illinois Wesleyan University  
7th Annual Celebrating High School Innovators competition   
Watch the final round competition presentations. “The competition identifies, 
fosters, and celebrates high school students whose contributions are excep-
tional and inspirational. Current 9 th through 12 th grade  students were eligible 
to apply in five areas:  
• Arts, Media & Literature  
• Business Entrepreneurship  
• Health & Nutrition  
• Social Entrepreneurship  
• Science, Technology, Engineering & Math (STEM) ” 

 
 
  
 
 
Page 10  
Thu. April 27 | 3:30 pm - 4:30 pm | Online  
Artificial Intelligence in Your Classroom  
“Artificial intelligence is here, and unlike what you ’ve seen in the movies, AI 
isn’t coming to destroy humans – it’s coming to disrupt our classrooms...  
Join us as we cut through the AI buzz and examine the implications of artifi-
cial intelligence in an education setting. In particular, we ’ll focus in on how 
recently released and forthcoming AI tools could impact how students learn 
and create going forward, as well as how educators can stay ahead of the 
curve with ready -to-use AI resources. ” 
Thu. April 27 | 9:15 am - 1 pm  | Chicago  
STEM Challenge Showcase   
“The 10th Annual STEM Challenge Showcase celebrates 20 student teams as 
they share their mentorship experience and present their innovative solutions 
to pressing industry challenges.   Over the past 4 months students have teamed 
up with experts in the field to collaborate on an authentic industry challenge. 
Students and their mentors have worked to collaborate, design, prototype, it-
erate, synthesize, and ideate to determine the best solution.   Join ISTC Educa-
tion for an in -person celebration as we hear from students across Illinois. ” 
Sat. April 29   
Illinois Institute of Technology  
Chicago Student Invention Convention  
“The Chicago Student Invention Convention is a program that typically runs for 
10 weeks and engages K -8th grade students in an invention curriculum. ” April 
is scheduled for competition and awards, including in -person showcase and 
awards ceremony scheduled at IIT in Chicago.  

  
 
 
 
 
Page 11  
Sat. April 29 | 10 am - 4 pm  | College of DuPage  
STEMCON  
“STEMCON is a public outreach event designed to inspire and educate K -12 
students in the fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics. 
This family -friendly event encourages scientific discovery through hands -on 
activities and demonstrations while providing the opportunity to learn about 
scientific careers from actual researchers, industry representatives and STEM 
educators. ” 
Challenge Open | March 1 - May 15  
NASA Aeronautics Dream with Us Design Challenge  
“Students ages 13 -18, come dream with NASA Aeronautics and help us envi-
sion and market a more sustainable commercial aircraft. Put together your 
dream team of 2 -4 participants and build a marketing plan to help convince 
a team of NASA experts that your design for a commercial aircraft should be 
chosen as the best sustainable design. ” 
July 17 - 21 | University of Chicago Data Science Institute   
AI & Science Summer School 2023   
“The AI + Science  Summer School will be held 
from  July 17th – 21st, jointly hosted by the  Data Science Institute  (DSI) and 
the Institute for Mathematical and Statistical Innovation  (IMSI) at the Uni-
versity of Chicago. This year ’s speakers will focus on applications of AI and 
Machine learning in core areas of domain science – materials and chemistry, 
physics, climate change and biology. The goal of the program is to introduce 
a new generation of diverse interdisciplinary graduate students and re-
searchers to the emerging field of AI + Science. We also hope this program 
can build community and spur new research directions focused on AI -
enabled scientific discovery across the physical and biological sciences. ” 

Page 12  
Earth Day - April 22, 2023  
Earth Day Action Toolkit  
“This year, we rally behind the theme ‘Invest In Our Planet ’ , which highlights the 
importance of dedicating our time, resources, and energy to solving climate change 
and other environmental issues. Investing in our planet is necessary to protect it 
and the best way to pave a path towards a prosperous future. ” 
Celebrate Earth Day With Education Resources From NASA  
“Explore these lessons and activities from NASA/JPL Edu to 
engage students in Earth Day on April 22. Get notified about 
upcoming events and the latest news from the education team 
at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory. ”  
The NASA Pi Day Challenge  
“You may already know all about the mathematical constant pi ( π) and how it can be 
used to calculate things like the circumference of a circle or the volume of a sphere. But 
did you know pi is also used all the time by NASA scientists and engineers to explore 
other planets?  
In this challenge, you can solve some of the same problems NASA scientists and engi-
neers do using pi! ” 
World Intellectual Property Day – April 26, 2023  
Women and IP: Accelerating innovation and creativity  
“In 2023, we celebrate the ‘can do ’ attitude of 
women inventors, creators and entrepreneurs 
around the world and their ground -breaking 
work.  
Women in all regions are shaping the world through their imagination, ingenuity 
and hard work, but often face significant challenges in accessing the knowledge, 
skills, resources and support they need to thrive. ” 

 
Page 13  
NIH | STEM T eaching Resources  
“The free K -12 STEM education materials on this site are provided by the institutes 
and centers within the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and NIH grantees, includ-
ing Science Education Partnership Award (SEPA)  recipients. ” 
IMSA | Summer Professional Development   
“From early childhood to grade 12, there ’s a pro-
gram for everyone!   Learn more about in -person 
summer professional development opportunities 
at IMSA. The IMSA Little STEAMers, IMSA Fusion, 
and Problem -Based Learning Series focus on how educators can teach curriculum 
in a way that follows core competencies which include inquiry -based, problem -
centered, competency -based, and integrative teaching and learning.  The IMSA 
Team follows participants ’ progress and are available to answer questions along 
the way. ”  
NIU STEAM – Summer Pre -college Experience Programs   
“NIU STEAM  provides students, educators, and commu-
nity members with experiences that increase individual 
STEM/STEAM knowledge and skills. This summer, NIU 
STEAM is offering two pre -college experience programs 
for eligible students at Northern Illinois University ’s 
main campus in DeKalb.  
• Huskies BELONG : Open to high school students graduating in 2024 who have a 
documented disability impacting their education, who intend to go to college 
and are interested in STEAM careers.  
• Food and Nutrition Science : Open to high school class of 2024 and 2025 students 
interested in food and nutrition science careers. ” Apply by April 15.  
Both of these programs are available to eligible students at NO COST to the student.  

Page 14  
"Arts foster scientific success" -Dr. Temple Grandin  
This series is dedicated to showing how art and creativity play a crucial role in our socie-
ty on its own and even within the STEM fields. There's a great deal of artistry that goes 
into our favorite products and media we consume that make our lives easier, or at least a 
bit more enjoyable, and teach us valuable lessons about history.  
NEA Art Works Podcast  
“The agency ’s podcast series contains audio interviews with arts leaders from 
across the country on arts issues of interest. Recent interviews include curator 
Amanda Burdan of the Brandywine Museum of Art on the  Votes for Women: A 
Visual History  exhibition; visual artist 
and disability rights advocate Gordon 
Sasaki on the importance of the Amer-
icans with Disabilities Act; and Randall 
Kline, executive artistic director of 
SFJAZZ, on their new approach to the 
performing arts during a pandemic. ” 
UChicago scientists develop new tool to protect artists from 
AI mimicry  
“A new tool allows artists to upload 
digital images with slight changes 
that are nearly invisible to the human 
eye, but confound AI art generators 
searching for references...  
Now, a team of University of Chicago computer scientists have built a tool that 
protects artists from the absorption of their style into these AI models. 
Called  Glaze, the software “cloaks ” images so that models incorrectly learn the 
unique features that define an artist ’s style, thwarting subsequent efforts to gen-
erate artificial plagiarisms. ” 

Page 15  
 
https://doit.illinois.gov/initiatives/doit -steam.html   
 
Follow DoIT on Twitter @IllinoisDoIT  
 
Follow DoIT on Facebook  
  
Follow DoIT on LinkedIn @IllinoisDoIT  
 
Please submit STEAM ideas, comments, or questions using our contact us form . 
Any links being provided are for educational purpose use  only; they do not constitute an endorsement, approval, affiliation, sponsorship, or partnership by the 
State of Illinois, Department of Innovation & Technology (DoIT) of any products, services or opinions of any of the linked en tities. The State  of Illinois bears no 
responsibility for the accuracy, legality or content of the external site or for that of subsequent links. Contact the extern al site for answers to questions regarding its 
content. The State of Illinois reserves the right to add or remove the links provided at any  time without notice in its sole  discretion and shall not be obliged to give a 
reason for doing so.  
