 
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
     
   
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
  
 
  
  
    
  
 
 
 
 All official NCHS BSC documents are posted on the BSC website 
(https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/about/bsc/bsc_meetings.htm ) 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Board of Scientific Counselors 
National Center for Health Statistics 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
September 17 -18, 2020 
Meeting Summary 
The Board of Scientific Counselors (BSC) convened via Zoom on September 17 -18, 2020 . The virtual 
meeting was open to the public (via Zoom) . 
Board Members Present 
Linette T. Scott, M.D., M.P.H., Chair, BSC 
Kennon R. Copeland, Ph.D. 
Prashila Dullabh, M.D . 
Darrell J. Gaskin, Ph.D. 
Robert M. Hauser, Ph.D. 
Mark D. Hayward, Ph.D. 
Scott H. Holan, Ph.D. 
Helen G. Levy , Ph.D. 
John R. Lumpkin, M.D., M.P.H. 
Sally C. Morton, Ph .D. 
Kristen M. Olson, Ph.D. 
Andy Peytchev , Ph.D. 
Ninez A. Ponce, M.P.P., Ph.D. 
Gretchen Van Wye, Ph.D., M.A. 
CDC/NCHS Participants 
Brian Moyer, Ph.D., Director , National Center for Health Statistics ( NCHS ) 
Jennifer Madans, Ph.D., Acting Deputy Director , NCHS 
Sayeedha Uddin, M.D., M.P.H., Designated Federal Offic er, NCHS 
Paul Sutton , Ph.D., Deputy Director, Division of Vital Statistics 
David Huang, Ph.D., M.P.H., C.P.H., Chief, Health Promotion Statistics Branch, Office of 
Analysis and Epidemiology , NCHS 
Jennifer Parker, Ph.D., Director, Division of Research and Methodology , NCHS 
Stephen Blumberg, Ph.D., Director, Division of Health Interview St atistics, NCHS 
Tina Norris, Ph.D., Health Statistician, Division of Health Interview Statistics, NCHS 
Ryne Paulose, Ph.D., Acting Director, Division of Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, NCHS 
Other Attendees 
Joyce Abma  Johanna Alfier  Yutaka Aoki  
Viviana  Aguila  Josephine Alford  Rihem Badwe  
Naman  Ahluwalia  Mercy Alvarenga  Brenda  Baker  
Akintunde Akinseye  Robert Anderson  Bryan Bassig  
Jessica Alexander  Nick Ansai  Joseph Baweja  
1 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 Kristian Billings 
Greg Binzer 
Jonaki Bose 
John Bowers 
Debra Brody 
Lisa Broitman 
Sherry Brown -Scoggins 
Verita Buie 
Virginia Cain 
Margaret Carroll 
Anjani Chandra 
Te-Ching Chen 
Donald Cherry 
Chanda Chhay 
Kristen Cibelli 
Jodi Cisewski 
Jay Clark 
Christine Cox 
James Crav er 
Lauren Creamer 
Nicole Cummings 
Lucinda Dalzell 
Barnali Das 
Orlando Davy 
Rebecca Devlin 
Hua Di 
Natalie Dupree 
Morgan Earp 
Nazik Elgaddal 
Tala Fakhouri 
Robert Fay 
Tammy Feenstra Banks 
Steven Fink 
Allan Fisher 
Heila Franco 
Alicia Frasier 
Chris Freedman 
Chery Fryar 
Matthew Garnett 
Connie Gentry 
Debra Gilliam 
Renee Gindi 
Maleeka Glover 
Jessica Graber 
Eve Granatosky 
Rachel Gruner Qiuping Gu 
Craig Hales 
Nancy Han 
Honorata Hansen 
Yulei He 
Holly Hedegaard 
Elizabeth Heitz 
Kevin Heslin 
Jacquie Hogan 
Julia Holmes 
Robert Hood -Cree 
Isabelle Horon 
Rebecca Hu 
Katherine Irimata 
Jessly Joy 
Sibeso Joyner 
David Justice 
Diba Khan 
Richard Klein 
Karen Knight 
Ellen Kramarow 
Melissa Kresin 
Deanna Kruszon -Moran 
David Lee 
Florence Lee 
Kristian Lee 
Sarah Lessem 
Xianfen Li 
Yan Li 
Zhaohui Lu 
Susan Lukacs 
Ann MacFadyen 
Donald Malec 
Gladys Martinez 
Meredith Massey 
Vickie Mays 
Juliana McAllister 
Susan McBroom 
Taylor McEwen 
Jody McLean 
Justin Mezetin 
Jasmine Mickens 
Kristen Miller 
Lisa Mirel 
Suruchi Mishra 
Leyla Mohadjer Jennifer Moore 
Dieudonne Nahigombeye 
Saswathi Natta 
Carolyn Neal 
Zakia Nelson 
Amanda Ng 
Duong Nguyen 
Jim Nowicki 
Colleen Nugent 
Tatiana Nwankwo 
Damon Ogburn 
Cynthia Ogden 
Rho Olaisen 
Vera Osidach 
Sue Pedrazzani 
Zachary Peters 
Michelle Poulos 
Paul Pulliam 
Jennifer Rammon 
Cynthia Reuben 
Minsun Riddles 
Vincent Rome 
Dorothy Roper 
Lauren Rossen 
Neil Russell 
Asel Ryskulova 
Neda Sarafrazi 
Jennifer Sayers 
Paul Scanlon 
Susan Schappert 
Jeannine Schiller 
Steven Schwartz 
Natasha Seam 
Bobbie Iris Shimizu 
Phillip Shiu 
Leigh Smith 
Merianne Spencer 
Suresh Srinivasan 
Pamela Stephenson 
Tammy Stewart -Prather 
Bryan Stierman 
Renee Storandt 
Yu Sun 
Rashmi Tandon 
Chally Tate 
Betzaida Tejada -Vera 
2 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
  
    
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
   
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
 
     
 
  
  
 
 Amanda Titus Julie Weeks Amanda Wilmot 
Anjel Vahratian Scott Weigel David Woodwell 
Lisa Wagner Karen Whitaker Jing Xu 
Meagan Walters Bryan Williams Wu Xu 
Edwina Wambogo Jean Williams Alana Yick 
Cha-Yih Wang Sonja Williams Carla Zelaya 
Valerie Watzlaf Stephanie Willson 
List of Abbreviations 
AMA American Medical Asso ciation 
AOA American Osteopathic Association 
APHA American Public Health Association 
API application programming interface 
BSC Board of Scientific Counselors 
CCQDER Collaborating Center for Question Design and Evaluation Research 
CDC Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 
CHC community health center 
CMS Centers for Medicare & Medicai d Services 
COD cause of death 
COVID -19 Coronavirus Disease 2019 
DRM Division of Research Methodology 
DVS Division of Vital Statistics 
HER electronic health record 
ER Early Release Program of the NHIS 
FY fiscal year 
HHS U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
HIS Division of Health Interview Statistics 
ICD-10-CM International Classification of Diseases -10 Clinical Modification 
Action Steps 
• Dr. Moyer encouraged attendees to review the new National Academies of Sciences, 
Engineering, and Medicine’s (NASEM’s) report entitled Best Practices in Assessing Mortality 
and Significant Morbidity Following Large -Scale Disaster s and suggested that it be discussed 
during a future NCHS meeting. 
• Dr. Moyer and NCHS will schedule a follow -up meeting to further involve BSC members in the 
efforts to develop case studies on sharing, linking, and preserving privacy of data. 
• A motion was made and approved for the BSC to draft a letter to HHS, CDC, and NCHS 
leadership containing recommendations for communicating to the public about data and data 
quality (i.e., about NCHS’ methodology for predicting data that are not yet available ), especially 
in the context of the pandemic.  Dr. Scott will share the letter with all BSC members for 
signature. 
3 
 
      
 
 
   
    
 
    
 
 
    
 
 
 • A motion was made and approved to accept the report of the NAMCS Workgroup and deliver the 
recommendations to NCHS along with comments made during the BSC discussion.  
• A motion was made and approved for the NAMCS Workgroup to continue to meet in order to 
support the NAMCS redesign. 
• A motion was made and approved to accept the Population Health Survey Planning, Methodology 
and Data Presenta tion Workgroup (PHSPMDP) report and convey the recommendations to 
NCHS. 
• A motion was made and approved for the PHSPMDP to provide recommendations to the BSC in 
order to develop challenge mitigation strategies and provide advice to the HIS regarding COVID -
19-specific challenges. 
4 
 
   
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
 
      
   
     
          
    
     
  
   
 
     
      
 
 
       
     
    
    
   
 
 
  
  
   
 Thursday, September 17 , 2020 
Presenters 
Brian Moyer, Ph.D., Director, NCHS 
Jennifer H. Madans, Ph.D., Acting Deputy Director, NCHS 
Paul Sutton, Ph.D., Deputy Director, Divis ion of Vital Statistics (DVS) , NCHS 
Andy Peytchev, Ph.D., Chair, PHSPMDP Workgroup , BSC and RTI, International 
Jennifer Parker, Ph.D., Director, Division of Research and Methodology , NCHS 
David Huang, Ph.D., Chief, Health Promotion Statistics Branch, Division of Analysis and Epidemiology , 
NCHS 
Welcome , Introductions, and Call to Order 
Linette T. Scott , M.D., M.P.H., Chair, BSC 
Sayeedha Uddin, M.D., M.P.H., Designated Federal Officer, NCHS, BSC 
Dr. Scott called the meeting to order. She asked BSC members to introduce themselves and state any 
conflicts of interest. No one reported a conflict of interest. 
Dr. Uddin introduced the NCHS team . 
NCHS Update 
Brian Moyer, Ph.D., Director, NCHS 
Jennifer H. Madans, Ph.D., Acting Deputy Director, NCHS 
Dr. Moyer described a recently established strategi c planning process to modernize NCHS . Plans include 
efforts to harness new data sources and techniques (e.g., leveraging electronic health records [ EHRs ]), 
expand both the capacity and scope of NCHS statistical analyses (e.g., combining sociology and 
economics data with more traditional health data), connect data from sources across U.S. statistical 
system s, and build the NCHS “Workforce for the Future ” to align with the Evidence -Based Policy making 
Act of 2018 . These modernization plans focus on both programmatic and operational improvements to 
NCHS and are being pursued with input from various external stakeholders in consultation with NCHS 
leadership. 
Given its recent challenges in communicating COVID -19 mortality data to the American public, NCHS is 
also considering streamlined communicati ons mechanism s (e.g., FAQ documents and one-pagers , as well 
as targeted outreach to specific subpopulations ) to disseminate important health data more effectively . 
NCHS Publications , September 2020 
NCHS published the following reports during September 2020: (1) Non-Alcoholic Beverage 
Consumption Among Adults, (2) Antidepressant Use Among Adults, (3) Early Release of Estima tes from 
the 2019 National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) , (4) Trends and Patterns in Menarche, and (5) State 
Suicide Rates Among Adolescents and Young Adults. Before October 2020, NCHS will also publish four 
reports on mental health sympto ms and treatment from the 2019 NHIS , as well as quarterly provisional 
estimates for selected birth indicators. 
Recent and Upcoming NCHS Webinars 
NCHS recently h eld webinars publicizing the latest data and reports from the National Health and 
Nutrition Exa mination Survey (NHANES) , describing COVID -19 plans for the Research and 
Development Survey (RANDS), and providing updates on the Healthy People 2030 release. NCHS will 
5 
 
     
 
 
 
 
   
   
       
 
   
   
    
  
   
  
 
 
  
    
      
  
  
   
  
 
   
   
    
 
     
 
 
 
   
  
   
    
 
 
  
  
     
 
 
   
   
    
  
 also hold webinars on the 2019 NHIS data release, with a special focus on mental health (September 23) , 
as well as on the 2019 NHIS redesign and intended use of the resulting new data (October, specific date to 
be determined). 
Household Pulse Survey 
Dr. Moyer described the Household Pulse Survey, a cross -agency effort to collect real -time data on the 
COVID -19 pandemic , as one of t he most significant accomplishments in the history of the U.S. statistical 
system. Seven federal agencies jointly develop ed and fielded the Household Pulse Survey , a web panel 
survey , to capture key economic, social, and health indicators relevant to the current pandemic (e.g., 
mental health, access to health care, and insurance coverage). The Household Pulse Survey, i n additi on to 
typifying a productive collaboration across federal agencies in the U.S. statistical system , provides an 
example of how NCHS might supplement its core surveys (e.g., NHIS) with additional data as part of its 
efforts to modernize public health data ca pture and analysis. NCHS has now begun to consider , as part of 
its broader effort to integrate disparate data sources to help meet policy objectives, how the Household 
Pulse Survey might be benchmarked into and made consistent with NHIS. 
Evidence -Based P olicymaking Act 
Based on the requirements of the 2018 Evidence -Based Policymaking Act, t he U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services (HHS) has established several committees and workgroups to develop case studies 
on sharing, linking, and preserving the privacy of data that have relevance to the work of NCHS . NCHS 
has been invited to participate in many of these case studies to provide expertise on topics such as 
expanding use of EHRs , addressing cross -government interoperability around opioid use data , and using 
differential privacy and other privacy -protecting algorithms to preserve or protect respondent 
confidentiality . Dr. Moyer aims to involve NCHS in as many of these Evidence -Based Policymaking Act 
case studies as possible and will contact NCHS membe rs with relevant expertise as more are developed. 
The Interagency Council on Statistical Policy is focused on developing a portal to improve researcher 
access to data across the U.S. statistical system , which is required by the Evidence -Based Policymaking 
Act. Such a portal would, for example , remove the need for researchers to apply to multiple agencies for 
access to desired microdata, both easing access and reducing cost. Dr. Moyer encouraged attendees to 
offer their feedback o r assistance in developing this new portal , which will benefit a wide range of 
researchers. 
NCHS Budget Update 
In FY 2020, NCHS received $160 million in direct budget authority and an additional $14 million from 
the more general Public Health and Scientif ic Services appropriation. Additional funding was obtained 
from reimbursable and special projects. These additional resources fluctuate from year -to-year. For the 
FY 2021 budget, the President’s Budget request reflects a $5.4 million decrease compared to FY 2020. 
Public Health Data Modernization Initiative 
NCHS has received approximately $3.5 million in FY 2020 data modernization funding, which it has 
used to promote in -home examinations as well as to improve mortality data. CDC is currently allocating , 
to various Centers, $500 million in modernization funds provided by the CARES Act. 
NCHS Staff Deployments 
Dr. Madans described the effects of COVID -19 on NCHS staff, highlig hting that 102 NCHS staff have 
served on formal COVID -19 response deployments . She report ed that on August 31, 18 NCHS staff left 
their typical responsibilities to deploy for an average length of 45 days to help manage the pandemic (e.g., 
providing technic al assistance, contact tracing, airport screening, and questionnaire translations). 
6 
 
   
 
  
  
     
   
   
 
     
 
 
   
      
   
      
   
 
 
    
   
 
 
 
   
  
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
    
 
   
   
 
   
 
 
     
   
    
    
   
  
  
   
 ICD-10-Clinical Modification Meeting 
NCHS, jointly with the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) , is responsible for updating 
ICD-10-CM (Clinical Modification). On September 8 and 9, 2020, NCHS and CMS ho sted an ICD -10 
Coordination and Maintenance Committee Meeting to discuss various requests for diagnosis and 
procedures coding changes , including those related to COVID -19.  There were 265 attendees at the 
meeting .  Coincidentally, a similar meeting was held at the World Health Organization on these days . 
During the meeting, 36 out of 60 submitted proposals to modify the ICD -10-CM diagnostic codes were 
scheduled for discussion , and 31 were discussed ; the remaining five will be discussed during a follow -up 
meeting. Dr. Madans suggested that the process adjusting changes to ICD -CM may require modifi cation 
as the number of proposals received has steadily increased since 2015. 
Regarding COVID -19 codes specifically, Dr. Madans noted that the public comment period on the 
propose d modifications will last for only 30 days to accelerate implementation ; comments are due on 
October 9 , and changes to COVID -19 codes will be implemented on January 1, 2021. All other 
modification proposals will be open for public comment for two months (comments are due on 
November 9) , and changes to them will be implemented on April 1, 2021. 
Virtual Data Detectives Camp 
Dr. Madans reported that NCHS conducted its annual August Data Detectives Camp virtually this year 
because of the COVID -19 pandemic. The Camp invites rising sixth and seventh graders to apply for a 
limited number of spot s (this year there were 16 openings) . Despite this year’s virtual format , the camp 
was a success and participants were happy with the experience. 
Closing Remarks 
Dr. Madans thanked the BSC for its valuable contributions to the work of NCHS , and especially thanked 
the following BSC members, who are departing the board and who were gracious enough to join us for 
one last meeting: Ninez Ponce, M.P.P., Ph.D.; Mark Hayward, Ph.D.; Prashila Dullabh, M.D.; and 
Darrell Gaskin, Ph.D. 
Dr. Moyer also thanked Dr. Richards, CDC’s Deputy Director for Public Health Science and 
Surveillance, who is retiring at the end of October 2020, for his leadership in support of the BSC. 
Discussion /Reaction by the Board 
A BSC member asked Dr. Moyer whether NCHS resources are spread too thinly among all of its various 
initiatives (e.g., augmented modeling and analysis capabilities, enhanced race and ethnicity data) , 
particularly considering the strain imposed by COVID -19. Dr. Moyer expressed optimism that 
forthcoming data modernization funds would help ease financial burdens but acknowledged the challenge 
of adequately funding all of NCHS’ initiatives with a limited budget . Member s stressed the need, 
particularly in the context of COVID -19, to ensure that the desire to obtain data quickly does not 
undermine the even more important need to obtain data that are of high quality. 
A member congratulated NCHS on the success of its Virtu al Data Detectives Camp and suggested that 
this program be expanded in the future , and that it might target groups underrepresented in statistics, as 
well as those that have been most affected by COVID -19. In another effort to account for race and 
ethnicit y, Dr. Madans explained that NCHS aims to create links across the U.S. statistical system (e.g., 
with the U.S. Census Bureau) to achieve greater breadth and quality of race and ethnicity data. However, 
she also noted that such linkages will not address iss ues in the core NCHS data that result from 
shortcomings such as limited sample sizes, adding that these issues must still be addressed separately. The 
BSC strongly endorsed further investment in these areas. 
7 
 
      
 
     
  
  
   
  
  
     
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
       
     
 
 
 
  
   
 
         
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
   
  
    
 
     
 
      
   
 Drs. Madans and Moyer were asked to clarify NCH S’ relationship with other parts of “CDC proper” that 
are involved in COVID -19 case reporting . Dr. Madans clarifi ed that COVID -19 case report data come 
mostly from state health departments reporting to CDC -Atlanta and not to NCHS; this same p rocess also 
generates CDC’s COVID -19 mortality data . NCHS relies on death certificates that must be filed in state 
vital statistics offices and then transmitted to NCHS where cause of death is coded and the data processed 
before mortality statistics can be released.  HHS also receives COVID -19 related data directly from 
hospitals using the HHS TeleTracking Portal or via direct submission from states into the HHS 
TeleTracking portal or into a platform called HHS Protect. However, the process for reporting CO VID-19 
data through these mechanisms (and the quality of those data ) varie s by state , resulting in inconsistencies . 
CDC also receives data from nursing homes through the National Healthcare Safety Network (NHSN). 
It was noted that NCHS’ data collection, storage, and reporting systems are well -honed and that it may be 
worth increasing their use in the reporting of COVID -19 data. Dr. Madans explained that the main 
obstacle to using NCHS’ systems is the overwhelming desire to report data quickly (i.e., withi n one day). 
CDC’s COVID -19 case and mortality data may be up to two weeks ahead of NCHS data.  However, CDC 
has increasingly relied on NCHS’ National Vital Statistics System (NVSS) to report on COVID -19 
related mortality.  Since NCHS’ COVID -19 mortality d ata results from a highly formalized collection and 
coding process may be capturing COVID -19 deaths that were not originally reported as such . Dr. Scott 
noted that augmenting NCHS’ formalized data capture/reporting processes with further automation may 
help combine high data quality and rapid speed of reporting . 
Actions 
Dr. Moyer encouraged attendees to review the new National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and 
Medicine’s (NASEM’s) report entitled Best Practices in Assessin g Mortality and Significant Morbidity 
Following Large -Scale Disasters and suggested that it be discussed during a future NCHS meeting. 
Dr. Moyer and NCHS will schedule a follow -up meeting to further involve BSC members in the efforts to 
develop case studi es on sharing, linking, and preserving privacy of data. 
COVID -19 Mortality Data Release 
Paul Sutton, Ph.D., Deputy Director, Division of Vital Statistics 
COVID -19 Response Timeline 
Dr. Sutton reviewed the timeline for the NCHS response to COVID -19, which was also presented during 
the BSC’s May 5, 2020 meeting : 
• February 26 : DVS decided to develop certification guidance for physicians reporting COVID -19 
deaths . 
• March 4 : DVS released p reliminary guidance for c ertifying COVID -19 deaths. 
• March 17 -20: NCHS updated the cause of death (COD) c oding system and created a new ICD -10 
code for COVID -19. 
• March 25: NCHS launched a webpage ( https://www. cdc.gov/nchs/nvss/covid -19.htm ) for 
resources related to COVID -19 death data. 
• March 27: DVS p rioritized manual COD coding for jurisdictions with a high volume of 
COVID -19 deaths. 
• April 2 : NCHS released final guidance for c ertifying COVID -19 deaths . 
• April 3 : NCHS released the first provisional COVID -19 death counts, which are updated every 
weekday. 
8 
 
     
  
    
      
 
 
     
  
  
   
     
 
  
  
     
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
       
  
   
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
    
 
 
    
 
   
 • April 16 : Several DVS staff (i.e., Rober t Anderson, Lee Anne Flagg, F arida A hmad) made 
presentations during the Clinician Outreach and Communication Activity webi nar, which reached 
nearly 17 ,000 participants. 
• April 29 : DVS r eleased a visualization for e xcess deaths associated with COVID -19. 
• May 1 : NCHS r edesigned the webpages that present provisional COVID -19 deaths. 
Dr. Sutton also presented provisional COVID -19 death counts by week, beginning with the first week of 
February and extending through September 8, 2020 , which totaled approximately 174,000 deaths . He 
noted that updated NVSS totals raise the death count to approximatel y 183,500 as of September 17 . 
Dr. Sutton also showed a comparison of NVSS’ and the New York Times’ COVID -19 death count data, 
which are nearly identical , with slight differences that are partially explained by case reporting 
discrepancies during April and May. Dr. Sutton stressed that while t he New York Times data are slightly 
more up to date (because of the time lag in death reporting through NVSS ), NVSS data are collected in a 
more standardized way (New York Times data are aggregates of death counts scraped from state and local 
health department websites) and provide detailed information about each individual death (e.g., in terms 
of demograph ics such as sex, age, and race; geograph ic area such as state, county, and HHS region; as 
well as comor bidities and potential non -COVID -19 causes of death , such as pneumonia and influenza ). 
Dr. Sutton highlighted the challenge of protecting individual s’ confidentiality and privacy while also 
providing detailed tabulations of these multivariate death data. 
COVID -19 Mortality Homepage 
Dr. Sutton described NCHS’ various COVID -19 Death Data and Resources available through the NCHS 
COVID -19 Mortality Homepage . NCHS provides various tables, some of which are updated on a daily or 
weekly basis, to researchers interested in these data. Tables include Daily Updates of Totals by Week and 
State ; Weekly Updates by Select Demographic and Geographic Characteristics ; Health Disparities: Race 
and Hispanic Origin ; and Excess Deaths Associated with COVID -19; as well as various ad hoc tables, 
such as Provisional Death Counts for COVID -19: Index of COVID -19 Surveillance and Ad -hoc Data 
Files . 
Dr. Sutton presented page view statistics fr om the Daily Updates of Totals by Week and State table, 
noting that views have been in the millions —which is very high for an NCHS page —and peaked in May 
at more than seven million views. He also noted that social media has driven traffic to NCHS’ COVID -19 
pages , including wide ly circul ated but erroneous posts suggesting  that NCHS was underreporting 
COVID -19 deaths (consumers of the data had not read the technical notes indicating that data were 
reported after a lag time). 
Dr. Sutton also presented the page view statistics for the Wee kly Updates by Select Demographic and 
Geographic Characteristics page, noting that they peaked in August with approximately four and a half 
million views , which was again driven in part by inflammatory misinterpretations of the data that were 
spread via so cial media . Although these interpretations have abated, t his page continues to receive an 
average of more than one million views per month. 
CDC Data Platform 
NCHS also releases COVID -19 mortality data through CDC’s Data Platform , which houses more detailed 
versions of all data tables included on NCHS ’ webpages . From this platform, researchers can access data 
via an application programming interface (API) that allows them to filter, query, and aggregate data. They 
can also visualize data and export them in various formats . 
9 
 
  
 
  
  
       
      
 
 
      
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
    
   
  
  
    
 
 
 
     
   
   
   
 
      
     
     
 
 
    
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  Health Disparities: Race and Hispanic Origin  
Dr. Sutton highlighted NCHS’ work in mapping the disparate burdens of COVID -19 mortality according 
to race and ethnicity. NCHS counts the number of COVID -19 deaths reported for each race and Hispanic 
origin group and maps the distribution of COVID -19 deaths for each of these groups as a percent of the 
total number of COVID -19 deaths reported . It has also established reference points for interpreting these 
data by calculat ing the unweighted distribution of each race and origin group as a percent of the total 
population as well as the weighted distribution of each group that adjust s for geographic areas impacted 
by COVID -19. 
Dr. Sutton presented these statistics (called “indicators”) as of September 9, 2020 for all Non-Hispanic 
White, Non -Hispanic Black or African American, Non -Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Native, Non -
Hispanic Asian, Hispanic or Latino, and Other populations in the United States. He also stressed the need 
to adjust these data for age, which in some cases has been a confounding varia ble. NCHS has attempted to 
provide researchers and other consumers with detailed context to help interpret these data, because their 
inherent complexity can easily lead to misinterpretations. 
Excess Mortality Associated with COVID -19 
Excess mortality is a measure of the difference between the number of deaths (from all causes) expected 
during a given time and the number of deaths actually observed during that same period. Dr. Sutton 
presented a graph showing th e excess mortality spike that coincided with the peak of COVID -19 deaths in 
the United States during May 2020, highlighting that debates over whether CDC has over or 
undercounted COVID -19 deaths should recognize that excess mortality rates are significantly higher than 
those obse rved in any other recent year, and that this excess appear s to be almost entirely attributable to 
COVID -19. 
Dr. Sutton explained that 2020 excess mortality statistics have been weighted to account for incomplete 
data. Weekly “snapshots” of provisional da ta from 2018 -2019 were used to model underreporting relative 
to final data , allowing completeness of provisional 2020 data to be predicted for various time intervals 
(within one week of death , two weeks, three weeks, etc.). Weights are then set as 1/comple teness for each 
jurisdiction (e.g., if provisional data in a particular jurisdiction was historically 50% complete within 1 
week of death, then the weight for that jurisdiction would be two). 
The total predicted number of excess deaths across the United States can be compared to either an upper 
bound set by a 95% confidence interval or to an average expected number of excess deaths , for a range of 
192,767 and 252,307 from February 1, 2020 through the week of September 7, 2020 . 
NCHS now presents excess mortality data in various new form s, including weekly counts of death by age 
group, by race and ethnicity, and by underlying cause of death . Dr. Sutton presented detailed data 
showing excess mortality statistics across several racial and ethnic cate gories: Non -Hispanic White, Non -
Hispanic Black, Hispanic, Non -Hispanic Asian, Non -Hispanic American Indian or Alaska Native, and 
Other. 
Challenges and Opportunities 
Dr. Sutton emphasized that provisional data have become “the new normal” as users cannot w ait a year 
for final data, noted that NCHS must continue to improve access to provisional COVID -19 death data and 
should begin thinking about how release of provisional data will be handled after COVID -19. 
He also stressed that current approaches for adju sting incomplete provisional data based on reporting 
patterns in previous years are inadequate, and asked attendees to consider whether data science might 
10 
 
   
  
 
 
  
 
     
   
   
 
 
   
 
      
 
 
 
  
    
   
 
 
 
  
       
         
  
 
    
   
     
     
   
 
  
 
   
   
 
  
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 offer solutions to provide a more dynamic approach based on real-time events that would enable more 
timely and accurate provisional estimates of key data and statistics. 
Discussion/Reaction by the Board 
One member asked how the Division of Vital Statistics might improve its presentations of data to the 
public to avoid the kinds of misrepresentations tha t Dr. Sutton described, which can damage the 
credibility of the division and of NCHS as a whole. Members agreed that it is of vital importance to stem 
the influence of misinformation as proactively and thoughtfully as possible, but also emphasized the 
difficulty for scientific institutions of countering intentionally politicized misinformation. 
Dr. Sutton was asked whether he had observed any trends in the quality of the adjustments made to 
provisional estimates of various health statistics. Dr. Sutton explained that adjustment quality increases 
with distance from any given week of data . He also noted that adjustment quality varies substantially by 
state, and some states have changed their reporting practices —in some cases accelerating reporting — 
since the onset of the pandemic. It has been difficult for the Division of Vital Statistics to account for the 
state-by-state variations in reporting practices. 
Dr. Sutto n also clarifi ed that case -based surveillance data are generated through two separate streams: (1) 
aggregate case counts and (2) the National Notifiable Disease System (which reports record -level counts) . 
He noted that the second of these streams contains many gaps and unknown variables , and that its data are 
therefore incomplete . This incompleteness contributes to CDC ’s reliance on NVSS as its gold standard 
for case data. 
Motion and Vote 
In relation to earlier comments, participants discussed the possibi lity of drafting an official letter to HHS , 
CDC, and NCHS leadership. This letter will contain recommendations for communicat ing to the public 
about data and data quality (i.e., about NCHS ’ methodology for predicting data that are not yet available ), 
especially in the context of the pandemic . 
A member moved to draft a letter addressing these topics and potentially proposing a framework for 
standard ized governance of CDC data. The vote was unanimous in approval (Dr. Lumpkin was not 
present for the vote). During the coming weeks, t he BSC will craft this letter , circulate it for review by 
members , and then vote to approve or reject it. Participants will review the transcript of this meeting to 
ensure that all BSC member s’ comments are reflected in the contents of the draft letter. 
Population Health Survey Planning, Methodology and Data Presentation Workgroup Report 
Andy Peytchev, Ph.D., Chair, PHSPMDP Workgroup 
Dr. Peytchev thanked the team of Westat , NCHS, and NHANES researchers that have contributed to the 
PHSPMDP Workgroup , which was charged with providing external input on several NHANES restart 
scenarios that may pose unique statistical and operational constraint s (Workgroup summary in Appendix 
1). Specifically, t he Workgroup aimed to explore several proposed scenarios for restarting the survey to 
complete the 2019 -2020 NHANE S cycle at different timepoints in 2021, discuss the implications of these 
options for the quality and utility of the 2019 -2020 NHANES data, discuss the impact of the various 
restart scenarios on the upcoming 2021 -2022 cycle, and submit an opinion to the BSC during its 
September 2020 meeting on the questions posed by the program team . This charge was developed as all 
NHANES ope rations were suspended by March 16 due to the COVID -19 pandemic ; data collection is 
still suspended until at least April 1, 2021 , and NCHS and Westat are studying the implications of this 
suspension for the 2019 -2020 and 2021 -2022 data collection . 
11 
 
   
   
  
      
    
    
 
 
    
   
 
  
 
    
    
   
    
   
 
 
    
  
   
  
 
   
     
   
    
   
  
 
  
 
     
 
   
 
  
   
   
   
   
   
   
  
  
 NHANES has a 4 -year survey sample design, but data are released in 2 -year cycles to reduce disclosure 
risks, with 15 primary sampling units completed each year. In prior NHANES cycles , each year ’s units 
formed a nationally representative sample ; however, beginning with the 2019 -2020 survey cycle, the 
annual samples were combined and reordered to address various operational challenges (e.g., to 
streamline travel) . This change, combined with the disruption of COVID -19, has resulted in an 
unreprese ntative partial sample: at the time that COVID -19 suspended NHANES ’ 2019 -2020 operations, 
only nine of 15 PSUs had been completed for each year , for 18 total completed PSUs , and completed 
PSUs underrepresent healthy people and completely exclude the West Census region of the United States 
(i.e., exclusions are nonrandom). 
The issue is further complicated by the fact that the 2019 -2020 survey contained a variety of new data 
elements (e.g., laboratory and questionnaire additions) as well as exam component m odifications. 
The PHSPMDP Workgroup has considered several options for completing the NHANES 2019 -2020 
cycle; these options are listed below , with implications briefly described below each option : 
Option 1: Complete the 2019 -2020 cycle to achieve a nationally representative sample (rejected) . 
o Restart data collection for 20 19-2020 sample (e.g., in April 2021 ) 
o Pro: Would obtain a 2019 -2020 nationally representative sample 
o Con: W ould mix pre -COVID -19 and post -COVID -19 data 
o Con: Would realistically preclude conducting the 2021 -2022 survey , given lack of 
remaining time in 2022 
Option 2: Complete a single year (e.g., 2019) to achieve a nationally representative sample (rejected) . 
o Six 2019 stands would be completed during 2021 
o A new 2021 -2022 sample would be drawn and collected 
o Could potentially retain 2020 PSUs for an “enhanced” sample with 24 PSUs (i.e., 
“Option 2b”) 
o Pro: Would obtain 2019 and 2021 -2022 nationally representative samples 
o Pro: All 2021 -2022 collection (24 PSUs) would be of post -COVID -19 data 
o Pro: New components could be added to the 2021 -2022 data related to COVID -19 
o Con: Limited analytic utility of 2019 dataset (a single year, small sample size) 
o Con: Would mix pre -and post -COVID -19 data for 2019 
o Con: 2019 data collection and release would span 3 years (from 2019 to 2021) and would 
include an approxi mately 10 -month gap in data collection 
o Con: 2020 -2021 sample would include fewer than the targeted 30 PSUs 
Option 3a: Do not complete the 2019 -2020 cycle, nor even a single year ; begin fresh sample in 2021 
(under consideration). 
o Use weight adjustment or model -based approach to achieve nationally representative 
sample based on 18 completed PSUs 
o Draw and collect data from a new 2021 -2022 sample (with 30 PSUs) 
o Pro: Would obtain a 2021 -2022 nationally representative sample 
o Pro: Would obtain all post -COVID -19 data for 2021 -2022 
o Pro: New components could be added to the 2021 -2022 data related to COVID -19 
o Pro: 2019 -2020 data would all be pre -COVID -19 
o Pro: 2019 -2020 data could be released during the first half of 2021 
o Con: Limited analytic utility of 2019 -2020 data with 18 PSUs and a smaller sample size 
o Con: Significant challenges with weight adjustment (e.g., 18 PSUs underrepresent the 
healthy and exclude the West Ce nsus region) 
12 
 
   
  
  
  
   
   
  
   
  
  
 
     
 
  
 
    
   
 
   
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
   
    
 
 
  
    
 
    
     
 
 
       
       
   
 Option 3b: The same as Option 3a, plus combine 18 PSUs with 2017 -2018 data to achieve nationally 
representative 2017 -2020 sample (favored) . 
o Pro: 2017 -2020 collection would be pre -COVID -19 
o Pro: Larger 2017 -2020 sample size for analysis 
o Pro: 2017 -2020 data could be released during the first half of 2021 
o Pro: Would include data from 2017 -2018 that are excluded from the 2019 -2020 PSUs 
(e.g., West Census region data) 
o Con: Estimates for new 2019 -2020 measures could not be produced 
o Con: Comple xity of combining across different sample designs 
o Con: Would release data only into the Research Data Center (RDC) (i.e., confidentiality 
restrictions would preclude public release) 
▪One Workgroup member has suggested either producing synthetic data to fill in 
gaps or generating synthetic respondents within PSUs that have not been 
completed; however, doing so for the entire NHANES would be laborious and 
error -prone, and data would still need to be held in the RDC ; therefore, this 
option has not been recommended. 
▪Collected d ata would likely be released as a convenience sample in the RDC; 
adjusted and weighted data would still be desirable to enable better accessibility 
and utilization of the data for users with lim ited statistical expertise . 
Dr. Peytchev noted that Options 1 and 2 are highly undesirable because of their cons (e.g., their mixing of 
pre-and post -COVID -19 data) , and that Option 3b is favored because Option 3a would require untenable 
statistical assum ptions about the PSUs that were not completed —Option 3b leverages 2017 -2018 data to 
avoid these assumptions. However, the utility of combined 2017 -2020 data remains unclear and depends 
on the method used to combine these data. This option may provide an op portunity to test different 
methods of data combination (an approach using the 2017 -2018 strata is being considered and seems 
reasonable). 
PHSPMDP Workgroup’s ( Tentative ) Recommendation s to the BSC 
• NHANES should not complete additional sampl e for the 2019 -2020 data cycle . 
• The 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 NHANES datasets should be combined to generate a larger 
dataset supporting better estimates . 
• The combined 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 data should be weight ed using the 2017 -2018 strata and 
evaluate d against historically based expectations. 
Discussion/Reaction by the Board 
Dr. Paulose noted that the PHSPMDP Workgroup envisions beginning NHANES 2021 -2022 data 
collection sometime around mid -2021 but added that much uncertainty remains because of COVID -19. 
In response to a question from a BSC member , Dr. Peytchev confirmed that the PHSPMDP Workgroup 
did not discuss public release of NHANES estimates . 
Motion and Vote 
A motion was made and approved to accept the PHSPMDP report and convey the recommendations to 
NCHS . All votes were in support of the motion ( Dr. Gaskin abstained as he was absent for Dr. Peytchev’s 
presentation , and Dr . Levy was not present for the vote) . 
13 
 
   
 
 
  
   
    
 
   
 
 
    
   
  
    
    
 
   
 
   
 
 
 
  
     
  
 
       
  
  
    
   
     
 
  
   
     
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
 Research and Development Survey (RANDS) Overview 
Jennifer Parker, Ph.D., Director, Division of Research and Methodology 
RANDS is a commercial survey platform that the NCHS Division of Research and Methodology (DRM) 
has used since 2015 to support its research methodology and evaluation studies. This year, RANDS has 
been used for a survey fielded during the summer of 2020 in response to the COVID -19 pandemic called 
“RANDS during COVID -19,” which was used to release estimates in three health areas: (1) telemedicine, 
(2) access to care, and (3) work loss due to illness from SARS -CoV-2. Dr. Parker provided an overview 
of RANDS and its current research areas, elaborated on RANDS during COVID -19, and posed several 
questions for potential discussion by the BSC . 
Overview of DRM’s Use of RANDS 
DRM includes three large programs : (1) the Collaborating Center for Question Design and Evaluation 
Research (CCQDER); (2) the Collaborating Center for Statistical Research and Survey Design (known as 
“the math stat s group”), and (3) the Research Data Center (RDC) . Both CCQDER and the math stats 
group use RANDS data , which are collected using recruited commercial probability sampled panels. 
Currently, RANDS includes six large commercial panels, which are often called “web panels” because 
they were developed to leverage the efficiencies of t he Internet. 
RANDS is used primary by CCQDER as part of its mixed mode approach for question evaluation (i.e., 
how embedded experiments and probes can be added into large surveys to complement CCQDER’s 
cognitive interviewing program), and by the math stat s group for estimation research (e.g., comparing 
data from panels with data from core surveys and evaluating methods for combining panel data with core 
surveys to improve estimates from the panel). DRM also releas es RANDS data (as public -use files and 
RDC files, as well as through its web page that was launched in April 2020) as a resource for 
methodological research by external investigators. 
One area of interest to CCQDER is whether open -or closed -ended probes work better for evaluating 
questions. In general, a n open -ended probe asks respondents why they responded to a prior question in a 
particular way , whereas a closed -ended probe presents respondents with a list of constructs related to the 
prior question and ask s which of the listed constructs were relevant to the respondents ’ prior answer s. For 
instance, a closed -ended probe might be used to determine whether different groups consider ed particular 
divergent factors when responding to the same question. DRM also uses RANDS for estimation research 
(e.g., using propensity score adjustment to combine /align RANDS data with NHIS, choosing reference 
surveys , selecting variables for adjustment and calibration models , leveraging variance estimators for 
combined estimates ), as well as to explor e the effects of question framings (e.g., using split sample 
experimental design s to compare the difference between responses to a question that either does or does 
not name specific health care providers when asking about experiences with opioid use ). 
Current RANDS Research Areas 
To date, four rounds of RANDS data collection have been completed, two are in the field, and another is 
planned , as summarized below (RANDS 1 and 2 were co llected by Gallup; all later rounds were collected 
by NORC): 
• Completed : 
o RANDS 1 (NHIS), 2 (NHIS), and 3 (opioids and disability) 
o RANDS during COVID -19, Round 1 
o RANDS during COVID -19, Round 2 
o RANDS 4 (opioids and disability) 
14 
 
   
  
  
 
   
  
  
   
 
 
 
 
    
  
  
 
   
  
 
 
    
   
   
       
  
  
 
    
  
   
 
      
  
     
  
 
   
  
 
  
   
     
 
    
  • Planned : 
o RANDS 5 (NSFG) 
o RANDS during COVID -19, Round 3 
RANDS 2 , conducted during 2016, added embedded probes to some of the NHIS questions to enable 
CCQDER researchers to evaluate those questions’ performance. RANDS 3 was funded specifically to 
examine survey questions on measur ing opioids and disability ; however, NHIS questions were also 
included to support DRM’s estimation program. RANDS 4 was the first round to include the telephone 
option , which helped DRM evaluate whether the additional sample improved RANDS coverage as well as 
the correspondence between RANDS data and NHIS . The envisioned RANDS 5 will focus on questions 
from the National Survey of Family Growth (NSFG) , and although it was originally planned to activate 
during Fall 2020, it will now likely activate during 20 21. 
RANDS during COVID -19 
In response to the COVID -19 pandemic, RANDS was adapted for estimation not only of COVID -19 data 
but also for general health topics. Traditional NCHS surveys cannot always adapt quickly to collect data 
on major events in real ti me. However, RANDS, as a largely web -based survey, was able to provide 
information on COVID -19 in a rapid and timely way. NCHS worked with the Office of Management and 
Budget (OMB) to adapt RANDS from a strictly methodological survey to one that could produce a 
limited set of experimental estimates. The new survey was named RANDS during COVID -19 to 
distinguish it from previous versions of RANDS. 
RANDS during COVID -19 was designed as a two -round longitudinal survey using both web and phone 
modes and wit h a minimum sample size of 6,000 in the first round and 5,000 in the second round ; these 
sample sizes were based on calculations of relative standard errors for expected prevalence of some 
subgroups for which NCHS intends to produce estimates. The question naire includes constructs —some of 
which will be used to generate experimental estimates —such as health status (i.e., chronic conditions or 
depression and anxiety), loss of work due to illness with COVID -19, health insurance /health care access, 
telemedicine access /use, and COVID -19-related health care and behaviors. 
Data for Round 1 of RANDS during COVID -19 were collected from Jun e 9 to July 6, whereas Round 2 
data were collected from August 3 to August 20, 2020. Both rounds included data from the probabil ity 
sampled panel NORC Amerispeak and from the opt -in platfo rm NORC Dynat a: 
• Round 1: probability -sampled: 6,800 interviews (78.5% completion ; 94% web); 
o 6,220 Dynata 
• Round 2: probability -sampled : 5,981 interviews (69.1% completion ; 93% web); 
o 5,502 Dynata 
Dr. Parker emphasized that RANDS during COVID -19 is a research survey, and that DRM continues to 
evaluate the performance of COVID -19 questions (e.g., comparing and calibrating opt -in and probability 
samples, examining mode effects across telephone and web survey s, calculat ing differences between 
rounds ). The questionnaire also included p robes to evaluate the questions . For example, an open -ended 
probe aimed at evaluating a question about telemedicine access asked respondents to explain how they 
knew whether their providers offered telemedicine ; answers revealed that some respondents const rued 
and answered the question as if it instead regarded their use of that service . 
DRM released RANDS during COVID -19 Round 1 Experimental Estimates on August 5, 2020 using the 
probability -sampled (i.e., Amerispeak) RANDS data. OMB approved release of estimates for the impact 
of COVID -19 on three variables: (1) work loss due to illness, (2) telemedicine access/use, and (3) missed 
15 
 
     
  
    
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
 
  
    
  
     
   
 
 
      
  
  
     
    
  
    
 
   
  
  
  
   
 
     
   
   
   
  
   
   
 
 
   
  health care. All the estimates were shown by age group, race and Hispanic origin, sex, education, 
metropolitan status , and reported/selected chronic conditions ( i.e., current asthma, diabetes , or 
hypertension). The estimates were calibrated to the 2018 NHIS on demographic and chronic health 
conditions (because 2019 data are not available) . This data relea se marked NCHS ’ first -ever release of 
estimates labeled “experimental.” 
Results of RANDS during COVID -19 were presented during a DRM webinar in late August 2020 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/rand s/presentations.htm 
Suggested RANDS Discussion Questions for the Board 
Dr. Parker posed the following suggested questions for discussion by the BSC: 
• How can data from commercial panels best be used to support core data collections? 
• Are there other statis tical, survey methodology, or data science questions that could be answered 
using the RANDS platform? 
• If NCHS use s RANDS for experimental estimates in other situations (i.e., besides COVID -19), 
what other estimation, measurement, or communications issues should be considered? 
Discussion/Reaction by the Board 
One BSC member noted that some of the estimates released by DRM from RANDS depart from those 
released by DHIS from NHIS , and asked Dr. Parker what other variables DRM has considered including 
in its released estimates and using for its statistical adjustments. Dr. Parker replied that DRM is interested 
in selecting variables that work consistently across a variety of outcomes and including those variables in 
both RANDS and NHIS. The member recomm ended that the estimation process incorporate a broader 
range of statistical adjustments, including not only demographics but also substantive variables that are 
highly correlated with the effects under investigation, and suggested that a replicat ion-based variance 
estimation method would suit this purpose better than a linearized weighting approach.  
Dr. Parker was asked whether DRM’s RANDS work has any relation to the Household Pulse Survey, 
which seems to cover similar topics in an overlapping timefra me. Dr. Parker noted that some RANDS 
questions were included specifically to determine the effectiveness of similar questions being fielded by 
other surveys , including the Household Pulse Survey. She also was asked whether there was any relation 
between DR M’s RANDS work and the National Science Foundation’s “ TESS project”; Dr. Parker was 
not aware of this project, but will follow up with CCQDER staff who may be aware of it. 
Dr. Scott asked whether Dr. Parker knew what factors might have caused RANDS estimates to deviate 
from NHIS and other benchmarks (e.g., probability versus non -probability components, respondents with 
or without internet access). Dr. Parker noted that respondents to the fi rst three rounds of RANDS were 
paid only if they responded via the web , which introduced respondent coverage difference s that may be 
ameliorated beginning with round 4, which introduced the option to respond by phone. She added that 
sampling variability an d non -response issues may account for some of the deviations. One member noted 
that her research group may be able to help address coverage issues in RANDS, particularly with non -
English speaking subpopulations. 
Dr. Parker encouraged BSC members to contac t her directly with any further questions about RANDS. 
16 
 
  
 
 
    
   
      
 
   
 
    
  
 
 
  
   
  
    
  
 
   
   
  
 
  
   
    
     
   
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
     
   
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
 Healthy People 2030 Rollout 
David Huang , Ph.D., Chief, Health Promotion Statistics Branch , Division of Analysis and Epidemiology 
Healthy People was established in 1979 as a 10 -year national initiative for improving the health of all 
Americans based on the latest available scientific evidence . It establishes measurable objectives with 
targets to be achieved by the end of each decade and is now in its fifth iteration with the recent release of 
Healthy People 2030. In addition to tracking data -driven outcomes to help stakeholders monitor progress 
and guide action s, Healthy People provides a model for international, state, and local program planning. 
The Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion (O DPHP) leads and manages the Healthy People 
initiative in collaboration with a diverse group of stakeholders, and NCHS forms a key component of this 
networ k—a Healthy People user study conducted by NO RC in 2015 found that 91 percent of respondents 
use Healthy People as a data source. 
NCHS compiles the data for the National Healthy People initiative, drawing from data systems at NCHS 
as well as from other sources and storing the compiled results in a d atabase called DATA 2030. NCHS 
provides statistical guidance for setting the Healthy People targets , with advice cover ing a wide range of 
issues, including the measurement of fundamental concepts such as overall health, health disparities, 
target setting, a nd disabilities. NCHS also helps to analyze and present Healthy People data through 
formal publications, web -based infographics, and social media content. 
Healthy People is unique among federal indicator initiatives in setting targets for objectives. NCH S 
provides statistical guidance in setting NCHS targets and has contributed to Healthy People 2030’s efforts 
to increase transparency and to systematize target -setting. Target -setting methods are summarized below : 
• Maintain consistency with national progra ms, regulations, policies, or laws 
• Maintain the baseline 
• Percent and percentage point improvement 
• Minimal threshold for statistical significance 
• Trends projection 
New target -setting tools were created to help workgroups select among candidate targets generated using 
the last three methods described above . An NCHS Statistical Note documenting methods and tools used, 
called Target -Setting Methods in Healthy People 2030 , will be released on September 21, 2020. 
Healthy People 2030 was originally s cheduled to launch on March 31, 2020, but the launch was delayed 
by COVID -19 until August 18. The virtual launch event included remarks from the HHS Secretary as 
well as the Assistant Secretary for Health, the Surgeon General, the Director of ODPHP, and Dr . Moyer. 
A total of 1,720 people watched the live launch event, and more than 2,100 people have viewed a 
recording of it on YouTube. A Twitter chat on Healthy People 2030 , which included participation from 
NCHS followed the live launch .  The launch itself generated approximately 60 million “impressions” 
across all platforms and the Twitter chat that followed the launch generated approximately 3 .5 million. 
The Healthy People 2030 website also went live alongside the launch event. 
Following a multiyear revie w of Healthy People 2020, Healthy People 2030 establishes 355 measurable 
core objectives of high national importance that address health equity and disparities, use baseline data no 
older than 2015, will benefit from at least two additional data points during the decade, and leverage an 
approved data source (e.g., federal, publicly available, and nationally representative). Criteria for data 
sources also include d having response rates/non -response bias analyses; and comprehensive 
documentation . Healthy Peop le 2030 is more statistically rigorous and leverages more timely information 
than previous iterations.  Its website, which includ es a new “Data Sources and Methods ” page, will be 
17 
 
  
 
  
       
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
    
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      updated more frequently than occurred for previous iterations and will allow users to crosswalk 2020 and 
2030 objectives. The website more explicitly recognize s the contributions of NCHS to Healthy People 
and link s to the NCHS website. 
In the coming months, ODPHP will publish the Healthy People 2020 Executive Summary .  In late 
October, during the American Public Health Association (APHA) annual meeting, HHS will release 
leading health indicators and “overall health and well -being measures,” which were previously called 
“foundation health measures.” 
The Healthy People 202 0 Final Review will be published by NCHS in 2021, along with a Statistical Note 
focused on elimination of racial and ethnic health disparities . Throughout the 2020s, Healthy People will 
provide the public with various interactive tools and infographics as well as reviews of HP2030 data. 
Finally, data and features from DATA2020 will be archived . 
Discussion/Reaction by the Board 
One member asked whether , in addition to reporting on race/ethnicity, disability, and sexual orientation, 
Healthy People 2030 might also report on smaller groups such as American Indians and Alaska Natives , 
as well as Native Hawaiians and Pacific Islanders. Dr. Huang confirmed that NCHS is open to conducting 
supplementary analyses that would cover such groups specifically. 
18 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
     
   
 
   
 Friday, September 18, 2020 
Presenters 
John Lumpkin, M.D., Chair of the NAMCS Workgroup and President, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of 
North Carolina Foundation 
Stephen Blumberg, Ph.D., Director, Division of Health Interview Statistics, NCHS 
Tina Norris, Ph.D., Health Statistician, Division of Health Interview Statistics, NCHS 
Ryne Paulose, Ph.D., Acting Director, Division of Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys, NCHS 
National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey Workgroup Report  
John Lumpkin, M.D., Chair of the NAMCS Workgroup and President, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of 
North Carolina Foundation 
Overview 
The National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) was developed to provide objective, reliable 
information about the provision and use of ambulatory medical care services in the United States. 
NAMCS uses national probability samples to survey and collect patient visit data from office -based 
physicians and community health centers (CHCs). Since its launch in 1973, th e NAMCS has expanded its 
data collection approaches to include different settings (e.g., CHCs) and data sources (e.g., computerized 
data and EHRs). The NAMCS currently samples 3,000 physicians, who are identified in the American 
Medical Association (AMA) a nd American Osteopathic Association (AOA) Masterfile databases, and 
104 CHCs (selecting 1 to 3 physicians per CHC), which are identified in the Health Resources and 
Services Administration (HRSA) CHC database. Information on approximately 30 clinical visit s are 
abstracted per physician sampled. 
Strengths of the NAMCS approach include that it is the only nationally -representative survey of both 
physicians and CHCs and that it directly extracts from medical records various data elements, including 
patient d emographics, rationale for clinical visits, and information on diagnoses, procedures, medications, 
immunizations, and laboratory testing. The NAMCS also extracts information on providers and sponsored 
content from other federal agencies, including data rel ated to EHR adoption and interoperability, alcohol 
screening and interventions, sexually transmitted infection and pre -exposure prophylaxis, and 
complementary health approaches. 
NAMCS Redesign Rationale and Recommendations  
Since the launch of NAMCS, clin ical settings where patients receive ambulatory care, as well as the 
physicians providing care, have changed. Physician offices have become more complex (e.g., hospital -
owned groups, conglomerates), and ambulatory care is provided in more settings (e.g., t elemedicine, off -
site care, retail clinics) than only in -office visits. These changes directly impact how NAMCS can collect 
data, specifically by increasing reporting requirements to prove the value of NAMCS relative to other 
surveys, improving data securi ty and confidentiality, and expanding the amount of EHR -derived data 
collected to align with increased EHR adoption. NAMCS methods must also shift to mitigate and address 
the consistent reduction in physician response rates since 2005. 
Based on recommend ations from federal and non -federal partners, the NAMCS Workgroup 
recommended a redesign to the NAMCS that would best fit the current state of ambulatory care 
(Workgroup report in Appendix 2) . The NAMCS Workgroup recommended that the NAMCS sampling 
process be updated by focusing more on provider groups, sites, and individual patients to better capture 
the role of non -physician providers and the full care experience; including hospital -owned outpatient 
settings; and implementing a hybrid approach that levera ges both the quick availability of EHR data with 
19 
 
 
   
    
  
      
    
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
   
 
   
    
  
 
  
       
  
 
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
      
   
 
 
   
   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 the robustness of manual data extraction. Further, the NAMCS Workgroup recommended longer 
measurement periods (1 year instead of 1 week) and quarterly estimates be considered to allow NAMCS 
researchers to better observe the full range of ambulatory care types, settings, and delivery techniques. 
The ultimate goal of the NAMCS redesign should be to increase the value of the NAMCS and maximize 
its ability to link external datasets in order to provide the most insightful and robust resource to the 
research and health care communities. 
Discussion 
One member asked whether the NAMCS Workgroup discussed methods to increase provider participation 
in order to improve response rates and all eviate physician burden. Dr. Lumpkin emphasized that, in 
addition to enhancing physician engagement, the NAMCS Workgroup aims to begin collecting data from 
vendors themselves and to implement minimal -effort data collection methods.  
Another member inquir ed whether the NAMCS includes (1) EHR information about whether patients 
follow through on the care (e.g., prescription use or referral) recommended by their physician and (2) 
information on new methods of ambulatory care delivery, such as telemedicine. Dr . Lumpkin noted that 
the NAMCS redesign should aim to collect information from all methods of ambulatory care delivery and 
adapt to incorporate new methods as they emerge; however, the EHR data thus far do not appear to have 
consistent follow -through infor mation. 
Members recommended that the NAMCS Workgroup (1) develop a set of research objectives and 
questions that the redesign will aim to answer in order to assess the results of the redesign, (2) investigate 
how shifting from paper to electronic records may impact data collected, (3) assess how different data 
collection methods impact the data received, and (4) create a prioritization order for its various redesign -
related objectives and activities. 
It was noted that the proposed redesign changes will likely require a clean break from the previously used 
approaches and inquired whether that break was intended. Dr. Lumpkin noted that the NAMCS 
Workgroup’s recommendation was to facilitate an immediate change from previous approaches to enact 
the new metho d with no ties between the two strategies. The NAMCS Workgroup could compare the data 
collected before and after the adoption of the redesigned approach to assess the impact of the redesign. 
Dr. Ward requested that the NAMCS Workgroup continue to meet in order to support the NAMCS 
redesign; members agreed with this recommendation. 
Motion and Vote 
Dr. Scott motioned to adopt the NAMCS report with comments provided from the BSC and to have the 
NAMCS Workgroup continue to meet in order to support the NAMCS redesign for the next 1 to 2 years. 
The vote was unanimous in support. 
Release of 2019 Estimates from the National Health Interview Survey Early Release Program 
Stephen Blumberg, Ph.D., Director, Division of Health Interview Statistics, NCHS 
Tina No rris, Ph.D., Health Statistician, Division of Health Interview Statistics, NCHS 
During 2019, the Division of Health Interview Statistics ( DHIS) released a redesigned National Health 
Interview Survey (NHIS) questionnaire, which aimed to improve the relevan ce of included health topics, 
harmonize content with other federal surveys, reduce respondent burden, improve data quality, and 
establish a long -term structure of periodic content. During September 2020, the NHIS has released 2019 
and Quarter 1 2020 data e stimates from the Early Release (ER) Program, 2019 public use data files, and 
NCHS data briefs on anxiety, depression, mental health treatment, and reasons for being uninsured. 
20 
 
 
  
 
  
  
    
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
     
 
 
   
   
   
     
 
  
    
 
 
  
  ER Program and 2019 Estimates 
The ER Program aims to facilitate surveillance of sentinel health events for the NHIS. This program 
releases both quarterly and biannual estimates for 18 key health indicators. Before the creation of the 
NHIS ER program, DHIS required approximately 2 years after the time of collection to release data; now 
estimates for key health indicators are possible only 6 to 9 months from collection to release. The 18 
NHIS key indicators , selected with input from the BSC, include information on health insurance coverage 
(e.g., public or private), health status (e.g ., disabilities, chronic pain, depression), health behaviors (e.g., 
smoking), care access (e.g., patient did not receive care due to cost), service utilization (e.g., influenza 
vaccination and blood pressure checks), and telephone ownership. DHIS chose ind icators based on their 
sensitivity to change and ability to provide insightful information on the respondent and will continue to 
evaluate these indicators for their ability to provide information related to the CDC’s priorities. Further, 
DHIS will soon co nsider whether to incorporate additional COVID -19 pandemic -specific indicators in 
order to compare data collected now to those from 2019; thus far, comparisons of 2019 and early 2020 
data from other surveys have shown a dramatic increase in mental health s ymptom severity. 
Last week, DHIS released estimates on data collected during 2019 and Q1 of 2020, including from both 
the interactive quarterly and biannual estimate tools (accessible from the NHIS website’s homepage 
https://www.cdc.gov/nchs/nhis/index.htm ) that perform queries to provide tabular and graphical 
visualizations of indicator data over time. Upon accessing either the quarterly or biannual estimate tool, 
users can select specific indicator s to view in graph form (with or without 95 percent confidence 
intervals) and filter their selection according to demographic characteristics (e.g., size of metropolitan 
area). Each tool’s dashboard includes links to documentation detailing the methods and data sources, to 
provide email feedback, and to a GitHub webpage (which includes the underlying code for the two tools). 
Working Paper 
In September, DHIS also released a working paper detailing the differences in respondent data observed 
between 2018 an d 2019 and whether those differences were caused by the NHIS questionnaire redesign, 
the weighting approach, or real change in order to provide data users with guidelines for use. During the 
redesign, DHIS updated the language of the questionnaire and added the requirement that individuals self -
report (i.e., other relatives cannot report for the entire family), as well as improved the weighting 
approach, which now includes paradata within the nonresponse adjustment and its calibration includes 
education al attainment, regional, and urban/rural variable information. DHIS evaluated the 2019 data 
using a split sample from Q4 of 2018 and identified four indicators impacted by questionnaire design 
effects, four indicators impacted by weighting effects, and two indicators impacted by both questionnaire 
design and weighting effects. Further, six indicators showed no impact from the redesigned NHIS, and 
another three indicators showed large but insignificant effects. 
NHIS and COVID -19 
Since June, NHIS has not en gaged in any in-person interviews but has conducted telephone interviews; 
these changes have led to significant challenges, largely in finding telephone numbers of target 
respondents because the NHIS is traditionally address based. Census interviewers were able to obtain 90 
to 95 percent of the target household phone numbers . Response rates were lower in April than in 
January -March, though they increased slightly in May and June. However, the respondent population 
shifted to include more older adults with high educational attainment and living in the suburbs. Further 
increases in response rates were observed when Census resumed in -person interviews on July 1 in limited 
areas. 
The NHIS data collection approach will change to respond to the COVID -19 pandemi c by requiring that 
all interviews must be attempted by telephone prior to pursuing in -person visits, halving the production 
21 
 
 
  
   
 
    
  
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
      
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
  
 
     
     sample size, and allowing interviewers to re -contact households sampled during 2019 (to collect 
additional data that can be examine d to assess pandemic -specific changes). 
Dr. Blumberg posed four questions (shown below) regarding how DHIS should proceed to obtain 
estimates for its four surveys (i.e., normal operations, telephone only, telephone first with reduced sample 
size, and sam ple adult follow -back survey). 
• What are the most important things to consider before combining these datasets? 
• Should DHIS combine the data collected by re -contacting 2019 households with 2020 production 
data? If so, how? 
• Should DHIS incorporate addition al nonresponse and calibration approaches? 
• Should DHIS release preliminary ER Program estimates before a defined approach is enacted? 
Any changes made to the NHIS approach will be documented and published alongside the results to allow 
users to best interpret the data. Whereas incorporating additional nonresponse approaches may appear as 
the obvious choice, other agencies have not used t hat approach. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau 
recently released its estimates without changing its traditional weighting procedures. 
Discussion 
The BSC recommended investigating the rationale for the Census Bureau’s decision to not introduce new 
weig hting procedures. 
It was noted that combining the 2019 follow -back data with 2020 production data is possible, as long as 
the combined dataset is useful, interpretable, and accompanied by sufficient documentation of the 
methods used, and recommended that the DHIS team collaborate more with its communications team in 
the future to review the released tools for readability and simplicity.  
Dr. Scott recommended that all NCHS survey teams actively communicate with each other in order to 
identify common cha llenges and to develop solutions. 
It was noted that the questions presented by Dr. Blumberg are quite complex and suggested continuation 
of discussions regarding these questions within the Population Health Survey Planning, Methodology and 
Data Presentat ion Workgroup. 
Motion and Vote 
Dr. Scott motioned for the Population Health Survey Planning, Methodology and Data Presentation 
Workgroup to provide recommendations to the BSC in order to develop mitigation strategies and provide 
advice to HIS regarding C OVID -19-specific challenges. The vote was unanimous in support (Dr. Dullabh 
was not present for the vote). 
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey Data Release 
Ryne Paulose, Ph.D., Acting Director, Division of Health and Nutrition Examination Sur veys, NCHS 
Current Approach for 2017 to 2020 Data 
Instead of the traditional stand -alone release, the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey 
(NHANES) data for 2019 to 2020 will be released as a composite release with 2017 to 2018 data in order 
to mitigate challenges of data collection during the COVID -19 pandemic and to create a sufficiently sized 
sample set. The 2020 data included in the composite dataset will be incomplete because sampling ceased, 
earlier this year and as recommended by the BSC will not be continued in 2021 . This approach allows the 
NHANES team to focus on processing the composite dataset, as well as to begin planning for the 2021 -
22 
 
 
  
 
   
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
    
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
 2022 NHANES data collection cycle, instead of continuing to attempt to work through COVID -19-relate d 
challenges. To date, NHANES has released two -thirds of the components of the 2017 to 2018 dataset, and 
approximately one -quarter of the components of the 2019 -2020 (the 2020 data year only includes 2 
months of data collection) dataset has been processed through internal quality control (QC) review. The 
2017 -2020 dataset is expected to be released during Q1 of 2021. 
Draft weights for the 2017 -2020 dataset were created by combining the primary sampling units (PSUs; 
i.e., 18 from the 2019 -2020 dataset and 30 from the 2017 to 2018 dataset) from each of the four years in 
order to account for not obtaining a full 2020 sampling. The combined dataset will be weighted through 
the same process used for the 2017 -2018 dataset, including processing related to nonresp onse bias and 
sampling variability assessments. 
One major challenge to the combined dataset is the potential to identify participants from the 2019 -2020 
survey, since the 2017 -2018 data have mostly been publicly released already. To mitigate this challe nge, 
NHANES has decided to only release the combined dataset within its Research Data Center (RDC), 
which has limited access and can regulate which data can be downloaded by users. 
Next steps for NHANES include completing QC of the 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 data individually 
before combining the data and developing a plan for the combined release through the RDC in 2021. 
Considerations for 2021 -2022 
The BSC has recommended that the 2021 -2022 datasets remain separate from the combined 2017 -2020 
dataset; however, the ability to collect and release the 2021 -2022 data depends on when survey field 
operations can eff iciently resume during the COVID -19 pandemic. Traditionally, sample selection and 
any new additions to the data collection protocol are outlined at least 6 months in advance of data 
collection, but with the pandemic still under way, there is still much uncertain ty. 
NHANES data collection for 2021 -2022 will likely begin in mid -2021, assuming complete data collection 
from 30 PSUs.  However, because of th e delay ed start NHANES is also considering a reduced number of 
PSUs in order to maintain flexibility and to collect a full, but smaller, dataset. If data collection must be 
delayed even further, the PSUs will likely be reduced to 15. NHANES is currently evaluating multiple 
scenarios for 2021 -2022 data collection (e.g., reducing PSUs and different start dates) to provide 
flexibility as well as to ensure that a data product will be produce d during 2021 -2022. 
Discussion  
A recommendation was  made  that NHANES retrospectively release the 2017-2020 data using the U.S. 
Census Bureau’s formal privacy mechanisms to re -release the datasets outside of  the RDC; he added that  
the dataset is likely losing utility by being inaccessible. Participants agreed with this recommendation and 
added that this approach could be applied to only a few variables within the dataset (i.e., those  that are not  
substantially changed by the reduction of personally identifiable information). One member  emphasized 
that the RDC will likely become overwhelmed with requests if  the NHANES 2017-2020 data are 
available only through RDC and thus NHANES should evaluate other options.  
One member suggested omitting examinations and focusing only on interviews in order to achieve a full 
set of PSUs. Dr. Paulose noted that if the approach must be reduced to that extent, the optimal strategy 
would be to pause all data collection for 2021 -2022 and solely focus on the NHANES redesign. Dr. 
Madans emphasized that reductions can be helpful, as long as the key indicators are not omitted and 
remain tracked over time to ensure the end product is useful. 
23 
 
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
   
 
 
    
             BSC Wrap -Up and Future Plans 
Linette T. Scott, M.D., M.P.H., Chair,  BSC  
Brian Moyer, Ph.D., Director, NCHS, CDC  
Drs. Moyer and Scott thanked the Workgroups and BSC members who participated and presented during 
this 2 -day meeting and for the Workgroup’s continued support and dedication to the objectives of NCHS 
even past their original complet ion date. 
A common theme that surfaced throughout this meeting is the importance of maintaining relevancy, 
which is a challenge experienced by all agencies within the surveying field. The presentations and 
discussions during this meeting framed the need for relevancy in terms of methods to advance NCHS and 
its surveys with the most up -to-date methods and strategies. 
Topics identified during this meeting that require further discussion include sharing case studies on data 
linking, privacy, and interopera bility; prioritizing programs across NCHS; combining NCHS surveys 
(e.g., RANDS and HIS surveys); and improving communications with policymakers and funders. 
Public Comment 
There was no public comment. 
The meeting was adjourned at 1:50 pm. 
To the best of my knowledge, the foregoing summary of minutes is accurate and complete. 
____________ /s/____________ November 25, 2020 
Linette T. Scott, M.D., M.P.H. DATE 
Chair, BSC 
24 
 
  
 
 
 
        
   
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  APPENDIX 1 
Population Health Survey Planning, Methodology 
and Data Presentation Workgroup 
National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) Board of 
Scientific Counselors (BSC) 
Friday, June 26, 2020, 1:00 -4:00 pm EST 
Zoom Virtual Meeting 
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  Workgroup Members Present 
Kennon R. Copeland, Ph.D. 
Robert M. Hauser, Ph.D. 
Scott H. Holan, Ph.D. 
Andy Peytchev, Ph.D. 
CDC/NCHS Participants 
Brian Moyer, Ph.D., Director, National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS) 
Jennifer Madans, Ph.D., Acting Deputy Director, NCHS 
Ryne Paulose, Ph.D ., Acting Director, Division of Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 
(DHANES), NCHS 
Sayeedha Uddin, M.D., M.P.H., Designated Federal Officer, NCHS 
CDC/NCHS Staff  Westat Staff  
Lara Akinbami  Jay Clark  
Stephen Blumberg  Robert Fay  
Amy Branum  Jacque Hogan  
Lisa Broitman  Leyla Mohadjer  
Te-Ching Chen  Minsun Riddles  
Tala Fakhouri   
Jon Hannings  Other Attendees  
Deanna Kruszon-Moran  Debra Bowers  
Aaron Maitland  Morgan Earp  
Crescent  Martin  Jessica Graber  
Gerry McQuillan  Ally Ratkowski-Howe  
Gwendolyn Mustaf  James Robert Wagner  
Tony Nguyen  Henry Yin  
Cynthia Ogden  Call-In Participants ( n=8)  
Jennifer Parker  Email Participants ( n=11)  
Bryan Stierman   
Eric Tolliver  Debra Gilliam  (Transcription, Caset)  
Lisa Wagner  Greg Richards (Meeting Host, Rose Li &  
Chia-yih Wang  Associates)  
David Woodwell  Kim  Williamson (Meeting Host, Rose Li  &  
 Associates)  
 Rebecca Lazeration (Minutes, Rose LI &  
 Associates)  
   
   
   
   
1 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
  
 
  Meeting Summary 
On Friday, June 26, 2020, the Population Health Survey Methodology, Planning and Data Presentation 
(PHSPMDP) Workgroup (WG) of the Board of Scientific Counselors (BSC) National Center for Health 
Statistics (NCHS) convened a meeting to provide input on several NHANES restart scenarios that may 
pose unique statistical and operational constraints and impact the utility of the 2019−2020 NHANES data. 
Summary of Workgroup Opinions 
Preferred Option 3 App roach 
WG members confirmed that they preferred the Option 3b approach of combining 2017 -2018 and 2019 -
2020 data and not completing additional sampling for the 2019 -2020 data cycle . This approach provides a 
larger data collection to create better estimates. 
Preferred Weighting Approach 
WG members agreed that using the 2017 -2018 strata to determine 2019 -2020 weights is the best way to 
begin combining the datasets. This approach can be a starting point for other modeling activities and 
provide a relatively si mple way to use the combined data. 
Evaluating the Dataset 
The WG noted that it had expanded the scope of its work to include recommending criteria to evaluate 
adjustments to the 2019 -2020 dataset. Members agreed that the NHANES and Westat teams should 
minimally test results against historically based expectations, as was done for the 2017 -2018 dataset. 
They added that WG members can provide guidance as this assessment is performed. 
Synthetic Data 
WG members agreed that they do not recommend producing synt hetic data but believe this approach is 
worth considering if NCHS wishes to release any data publicly. 
Impact of a Delay in Re -entering the Field 
Workgroup members noted that because they have restricted their discussion to Option 3, which handles 
already -completed data collection separately from future data collection, the opinions they formed should 
not be affected by future delays. 
The WG also suggested that it might be best for NHANES to assume that delays will occur. They noted 
that even surveys ree ntering the field are unable to do so in all planned locations; such challenges may be 
magnified by the nature of NHANES’ examinations and population. 
2 
 
 
  
 
  
  
 
    
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
   
  
 
     
   
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
  Friday, June 26, 2020 
Presenter  
Ryne Paulose, Ph.D ., Acting Director, Division of Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 
Welcome, Introductions, and Call to Order 
Brian Moyer, Ph.D., Director, NCHS  
Andy  Peytchev, Ph.D.  
Sayeedha Uddin, M.D., M.P.H., Designated Federal Officer, NCHS  
 
Dr. Peytchev called the inaugural meeting of the Population Health Survey Planning, Methodology and 
Data Presentation (PHSPMDP) Workgroup (WG) to order. He asked WG members to introduce 
themselves and state any conflicts of interest. None of the WG members stated a conflict of interest. 
Dr. Uddin explai ned that findings from this meeting regarding the resumption of NHANES survey 
operations will be presented at a public NCHS BSC meeting in September. 
Dr. Moyer thanked the participants for discussing the challenges facing the NHANES program and 
potential solutions. He noted that the board looked forward to receiving advice on options for completing 
the 2019 -2020 NHANES data collection, which was suspended in response to the COVID -19 pandemic. 
Overview of NHANES Restart Options 
Ryne Paulose, Ph.D ., Acting Director, Division of Health and Nutrition Examination Surveys 
Dr. Paulose introduced herself as the acting director of NHANES. She also introduced Westat colleagues, 
who she said played a vital role in designing potential approaches to completing NHANES ’ 2019 -2020 
data collection. Dr. Paulose noted that these approaches were detailed in an Excel spreadsheet distributed 
before the meeting. She explained that her presentation would offer a visual overview of the approaches 
in order to encourage discussion about potential pathways, including hybrids of different options. 
Dr. Paulose emphasized that decisions regarding the 2019 -2020 data collection will have implications for 
NHANES’ 2021 -2022 cycle. She noted that these implications were described in the out line distributed 
ahead of the meeting and would be addressed in her presentation, as well. 
The COVID -19 Response 
NHANES suspended field operations in March 2020 in response to the COVID -19 pandemic. Multiple 
aspects of the pandemic led to this suspension, including the varying risks of exposure throughout the 
country, the number of NHANES staff and respondents in high -risk groups, and the potential reluctance 
of NHANES respondents to participate in face -to-face interviews and examination center visits. 
During the suspension, the 12 trailers that make up the 3 mobile NHANES centers have been parked at 
the USDA Agricultural Research Center in Beltsville, MD. Returning these centers to the field will 
depend on NHANES’ ability to ensure the safety of staff and respondents. Assessing risk is complicated, 
however, given the complexity of NHANES operations and the differences in risk at the state and county 
levels. 
Restarting Data Collection and Field Operations 
Dr. Paulose outlined the WG workgroup’s goals as f ollows: (1) examine several scenarios for completing 
the 2019 -2020 NHANES cycle, (2) discuss the implications of these options for the quality and utility of 
3 
 
 
  
 
 
 
    
 
  
    
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
    
    
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 the 2019 -2020 NHANES data, and (3) discuss the impact of the various scenarios on the upcoming 20 21-
2022 NHANES cycle. 
NHANES is designed as a 4 -year survey sample with data released on a 2 -year cycle. Each 2 -year cycle 
includes 30 primary sampling units (PSUs), 15 for each year. Historically, each year of data collection 
was designed to create a nat ionally representative sample. However, beginning with the 2019 -2020 cycle, 
NHANES combined and reordered its PSUs to reduce travel time and increase survey time at each unit. 
Before suspending operations, NHANES had completed data collection for 18 out of 30 PSUs for the 
2019 -2020 survey cycle: nine 2019 PSUs and nine 2020 PSUs. When the sampled PSUs for 2019 -2020 
were split by healthy state group and census region , the NHANES team found that the samples skewed 
toward people in the two lower healthy stat e tiers and did not capture any states from the West. The 
results to date are thus not a nationally representative dataset and cannot be released as is. 
New and modified survey content introduced in the 2019 -2020 cycle introduces another challenge. The 
recent additions and modifications affect the exam, questionnaire, and laboratory tests; for example, the 
exam’s blood pressure collection was modified from a mercury sphygmomanometer to an automated 
blood pressure cuff. However, the relativ ely small amount of somewhat skewed data collected thus far 
does not allow meaningful interpretation of these measures, and the lack of previous year data would 
prevent any attempt to produce synthetic data. Thus, no conclusions on these measures can be dr awn. 
In response to these challenges, Westat and NHANES staff have worked together to ascertain the options 
for completing the 2019 -2020 data collection and the potential effects of those options on 2021 -2022 data 
collection. Dr. Paulose presented three o ptions for returning the NHANES survey to the field. 
Option 1: Restart the 2019 -2020 Cycle in 2021 
The first option is to restart the 2019 -2020 cycle in 2021 and to collect data from the remaining 12 PSUs 
at that time. Given the operational considerations necessary to restart NHANES data collection, January 
2021 is the earliest date collection could resume, with a more conservative reopening timeline starting in 
April 2021. Collection of 2019 -2020 PSUs would run through November 2021 and be r eleased in 2022. 
Restarting the 2019 -2020 cycle in 2021 would allow NHANES to collect a nationally representative 
sample. However, this cycle would collect both pre -and post -COVID -19 pandemic data in one survey, 
which may affect results. Additionally, no new COVID -19 measurements could be added to the 2019 -
2020 cycle, delaying the release of any measures of this significant health issue. Finally, a 2 -year cycle 
would be collected over a 3 -year span with a 10 -month gap. 
In addition to these impacts on the 2019 -2020 data, restarting in 2021 would also delay and reduce the 
size of the 2021 -2022 cycle. The new cycle would not start until November 2021, with the possibility of 
collecting 16 -18 PSUs (rather than 30) over the remainder of 2021 and through 2022. If the NHANES 
team were not ready to re -enter the field in January 2021 and instead chose to restart data collection in 
April 2021, the gap in 2019 -2020 data collection would be lengthened beyond November 2021 and the 
possibility of completing a 2021 -2022 cycle would be eliminated. 
Option 2: Complete One Annual Sample in 2021 
The second option is to complete the 2019 (but not the 2020) national sample. Under this approach, with 
data from 9 of the 2019 PSUs already collected, the NHANES team would need to c omplete data 
collection for only the remaining 6 2019 PSUs. If NHANES were able to re -enter the field in January 
2021, data collection could be completed by July or August 2021. 
4 
 
 
   
    
 
   
 
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
  
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
  
  
 
  
  
   
 
  
 
  
 
  Compared to restarting the full 2019 -2020 data collection, completing only th e 2019 sample would also 
allow NHANES to collect a nationally representative sample for the 2019 and 2021 -2022 cycles; would 
enable the 2021 -2022 collection to enter the field sooner; and would thus allow earlier incorporation of 
new COVID -19 related measu res into the 2021 -2022 survey. However, this option reduces the analytic 
utility of the 2019 dataset, while still mixing pre -and post -COVID -19 data and incorporating a 10 -month 
gap in data collection. Moreover, the 2021 -2022 cycle would be reduced from 30 to approximately 24 
total PSUs. 
Within this approach, a sub -option would retain the already -collected 2020 PSU data to create an 
“enhanced” 2019 sample with 24 total PSUs. This approach would allow both the 2019 -2020 and 2021 -
2022 cycles to be nationally representative, with both cycles limited to 24 PSUs each. 
Option 3: Use Data from 18 Completed PSUs to Create a Nationally Representative Sample 
Under a third option, NHANES would not complete the 2019 -2020 cycle but would instead use the 
already -collect ed data from 18 PSUs to generate a nationally representative sample. NHANES and Westat 
teams have defined 2 ways to achieve this goal. 
The first approach, Option 3a, would use the 2019 -2020 data as it was collected and apply weighting to 
adjust for its bi ases. 2019 -2020 data would consist entirely of pre -COVID -19 data and could be released 
in the first half of 2021. The NHANES team would re -enter the field in January 2021 to begin the 2021 -
2022 cycle with a full complement of 30 PSUs, yielding a nationally representative 2021 -2022 sample. 
The new cycle would be collected fully post -COVID -19 and would allow for the addition of new 
COVID -19-related measures. 
However, weighting would face significant challenges, given the less healthy population and lack of W est 
census region PSUs in the data collected thus far. Additionally, the reduced sample size in this approach 
may limit the analytic utility of the resulting data. Finally, due to its small size, the sample would be 
restricted to an internal release (i.e., in RDC only). 
Therefore, the second approach, Option 3b, would weight the existing 2019 -2020 data but also combine it 
with the immediately previous 2017 -2018 cycle data in order to achieve a nationally representative 
sample. This approach would retain 20 21-2022 as a complete cycle with 30 PSUs, collected post -COVID -
19, with the potential for COVID -19-related measures. This approach would also create a pre -COVID -19 
sample large enough to provide analytic utility and to be released in the first half of 2021 . 
However, Option 3b would render the new measures added to the 2019 -2020 cycle unusable. It would 
also mix two sample designs: the 2017 -2018 cycle is part of the 2015 -2018 sample design, while the 
2019 -2020 is part of the 2019 -2022 sample design. This mi xture would complicate the process of 
combining the data. Finally, the previous release of the 2017 -2018 cycle data creates a disclosure risk, 
which would require the new 2017 -2020 dataset to be released in RDC only. 
Although the three options presented are not the only potential approaches, they represent the possibilities 
that appeared most feasible to the NHANES and Westat teams. Dr. Paulose noted that discussion may 
lead to a combination of approaches. 
5 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
    
 
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
  
 
  
 
  
    
  
 
  
 
 
     
       
 
    
  
 
 
    
 
 Discussion  of Presentation  
Discussion focused on Option 3, with consideration of its advantages, constraints, and considerations for 
potential implementation. 
Preference for Option 3 
A WG member began by expressing interest in Option 3b. When prompted by Dr. Fakhou ri to explain 
why, the member noted that this option’s model -based statistical approach is generally useful for 
leveraging dependencies and increasing precision; moreover, it can be helpful when data must be 
combined from different platforms or are missing entirely. 
Another WG member added that by comparison, Options 1 and 2 undesirably mix pre -and post -COVID -
19 data. The member expected that many key measures will be affected by COVID -19 and that mixing 
pre-and post -pandemic data will make it impossible for researchers to disentangle these effects. Dr. 
Wagner suggested that because the pandemic intervened in the middle of the potential data collection 
period, this mixing would be equivalent to measuring 2 different populations. 
Dr. Fakhouri suggested th at the omission of West region states from the initial 2019 -2020 data collection 
could magnify the problem of mixing pre -and post -pandemic exposure data. For example, Hispanics — 
who are disproportionately likely to experience a negative COVID -19 outcome —would be sampled 
primarily in the hypothetical post -COVID -19 round of 2019 -2020 data collection envisioned in Options 1 
and 2, undermining the ability to see changes in the pre -and post -pandemic data for this subpopulation. 
Clarification of the Data Gaps t o Be Addressed by Option 3 
BSU members discussed the nature of the data gaps in the 2019 -2020 dataset. One member clarified that 
the order of PSU sampling was driven by and thus reflects only operational considerations, not a more 
problematic health -based skewing. Another WG member confirmed this observation, noting that 
NHANES’ combination and geographical ordering of PSUs over a two -year period was intended largely 
to streamline travel time and thus increase opportunities for data collection. 
Dr. Fay not ed that the NHANES and Westat teams considered multiple ways to weight the incomplete 
data, including weighting by geography (a form of propensity weighting) or weighting by health (a form 
of stratum -based weighting). They ultimately decided that weighting by geography was not consistent 
with the complete absence of West census region data and thus de -emphasized geographic weighting in 
favor of health stratum. Researchers with RDC access may be able to model the data in other ways. 
Rationale for Developing Option 3b 
A WG member asked why the NHANES and Westat teams developed Option 3b: in other words, why did 
they suggest not only weighting the 2019 -2020 data (Option 3a), but also combining that weighted data 
with the 2017 -2018 dataset. Dr. Paulose suggeste d that the resulting 4 -year sample would allow for more 
precise national estimates; she mentioned that the combination of distinct 2 -year datasets is one of 
NHANES’ recommendations for achieving precision and accuracy and is aligned with the procedures of 
other existing national estimates. Dr. Mohadjer later added that larger samples are helpful to NHANES 
users, whose studies of health conditions in small populations often are restricted by small samples sizes. 
Dr. Mohadjer also noted that the NHANES and W estat teams found it quite challenging to weight the 
incomplete 2019 -2020 data, given the lack of data from the West. The teams saw the integration of the 
data with the most recent nationally representative sample as a way to overcome this challenge. Dr. F ay 
agreed that compared to Option 3a, the combined approach used a less model -reliant method to fill data 
gaps, which he preferred. 
6 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
 
  
 
    
 
 
   
   
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
  
    
 
  
   
 
  
 
 Comparative Advantages of Options 3a and 3b 
Dr. Paulose emphasized that Options 3a and 3b are not mutually exclusive: NHANE S could release the 
weighted 2019 -2020 data in the RDC as a convenience sample (Option 3a) while also creating a 
combined 2017 -2020 dataset (Option 3b). A WG member expressed interest in this dual approach, but 
members also debated the relative advantages of Options 3a and 3b. 
In response to WG members’ questions, Dr. Paulose clarified that both options share some limitations. 
Both would be restricted to release in the RDC (because the 18 PSUs in the 2019 -20 sample fall below 
the threshold to protect confi dentiality). Both would also require significant caveats and explanation with 
their release —to explain the weighting or modeling required by Option 3a and to explain the combination 
methodology required by Option 3b. 
Dr. Fay noted that Option 3a, unlike Option 3b, would preserve the measures newly introduced in 2019 -
2020. These measures would otherwise be lost in the merger with an earlier data cycle in which they did 
not exist. However, he mentioned that despite this fact, he still favored Option 3b. 
One WG member argued that Option 3a has the disadvantage of omitting data from the West and from 
some key subpopulations represented there (e.g., Hispanic communities) and thus suggested that Option 
3b is preferable. However, another member suggested that Option 3b also has a disadvantage: by 
collapsing 2019 -2020 data into a combined 2017 -2020 dataset, this option may obscure the immediate 
pre-COVID -19 period and thus may not facilitate the kinds of pre -and post -COVID -19 comparisons that 
researchers m ay wish to perform. 
WG members discussed the likelihood and significance of this pandemic -related disadvantage. Dr. 
Mohadjer predicted that the 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 data would not exhibit large differences; instead, 
she expected divergences to appear b etween the combined 2017 -2020 data and the future 2021 -2022 data. 
A WG member suggested analyzing both datasets to confirm this prediction, and Dr. Mohadjer agreed 
that analysis would be worthwhile. Another member asked whether analysts could combine the 2 019-
2020 data with the data from only 2018, in order to shorten the pre -COVID -19 time period included in the 
sample and thus support a more precise comparison to the 2021 -2022 post -COVID -19 data. Dr. Paulose 
suggested that splitting the 2017 -2018 data, whi ch have already been released, could create 
complications. 
One WG member ultimately questioned whether combining the 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 data would 
truly overcome the health bias observed in the more recent data cycle. The member noted that the 2017 -
2018 dataset was also biased towards a less healthy population, and that bias persisted on some variables 
even after adjustment. Combining this somewhat biased dataset with a clearly biased dataset may not 
entirely resolve the problem in the latter. 
Potent ial Role of Synthetic Data in Option 3 
A WG member suggested that for the new measures introduced during 2019 -2020, NHANES could 
generate synthetic data for 2017 -2018. NHANES and Westat team members believed it might be possible 
to perform the statistical matching necessary to pursue this approach, although another WG member 
noted that the team would have no opportunity to test the covariates of the new measures. 
Dr. Wagner asked whether synthetic survey data could also address gaps in the 2019 -2020 data, as well as 
mitigate disclosure risks inherent in the small number of completed PSUs. A WG member expressed 
concern that in complex datasets with multiple variables, synthetic data can fail to capture the multi -
faceted relationships across those variables. Dr. Mohadjer added that while Westat has created synthetic 
data to preserve confidentiality, it has done so only when an entire underlying dataset was available. 
7 
 
 
  
  
 
    
    
 
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
  
   
  
    
 
    
  
 
    
     
 
     
  
    
     
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
      
  
 
  
   
 
  
  Using Combined Data for Trend Analyses and Moving Averages 
WG members debated the feasibility of using combined data to conduct trend analyses. Dr. Paulose stated 
that combining 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 data (Option 3b) would eliminate the ability to compare trends 
across these datasets. However, a WG member suggested that with certain a ssumptions in place, the 
NHANES team might be able to produce a model -based estimate of trends. Dr. Fakhouri believed that the 
unrepresentative nature of the 2019 -2020 data (particularly given its omission of West census regions) 
would pose a challenge to this modeling. However, the WG member observed that building such a model 
would be theoretically possible, depending on the length of the timestamp in the dataset and the 
correlations between geographical regions. By comparison, the Census creates models w hen entire states 
are missing from survey data. Similarly, if the NHANES data were rich enough, observed data could be 
used to generate estimates for the unobserved data. 
Another WG member suggested that to determine the feasibility of this approach, the NHANES and 
Westat teams would likely need to assess the consistency of data over time in previous NHANES cycles. 
If data are relatively consistent or change in a linear way, then a representative model could likely be 
built. Dr. Fay noted that his early ex amination of trends revealed little consistency over time, even when 
geographical data were divided into 5 regions (with the South split into the South Atlantic and South). 
Dr. Mohadjer confirmed that modeling would require many assumptions and suggested that multiple 
models would likely be needed for different variables. Dr. Fay suggested that models might be developed 
by researchers in the RDC if they had access to NHANES’ geographical data, but he agreed that a global 
solution may be inadequate for all characteristics. 
A WG member suggested that ultimately the feasibility of modeling depends not only on its theoretical 
possibility but also on the practicality of conducting the requisite analyses in the available time frame. 
Several WG members suggested that if combining data were useful, that practice could be extended 
beyond the 2017 -2020 datasets. They noted that other studies (e.g., ACS) have set a precedent for rolling 
data releases in multi -year datasets, which effectively creates a “moving average ” that researchers can 
probe in a variety of ways. One WG member asked if NHANES should move toward that model by 
eventually releasing a combination of 2019 -2020 and 2021 -2022 data, or more generally by releasing 4 -
year data -sets every 2 years. Dr. Paulose suggested that some health outcomes not affected by the 
COVID -19 pandemic might be studied in a combination of 2019 -2020 and 2021 -2022 data. However, 
another WG member remained skeptical that combined pre -and post -pandemic data would be useful to 
researc hers. Another WG member noted that the 10 -month data gap between cycle collections would be 
an obstacle to a combination of 2019 -2020 and 2021 -2022 datasets. 
Dr. Madans raised a set of more fundamental questions about the utility of combining data in the past or 
future. She noted that the 2019 -2020 data consist largely of just one year’s worth of PSUs and argued that 
this addition would not support confident trend analyses beyond what could be observed in the already -
released 2017 -2018 data. She also quest ioned the value of moving averages in the future: she observed 
that NHANES is not a large national sample like ACS and thus wondered whether the WG and staff 
would be confident that changes in moving averages in NHANES datasets stemmed from the data itself or 
from assumptions applied during the adjustment and weighting process. 
Based on Dr. Madans’ questions, several WG members agreed that in any pathway forward, the WG must 
minimally determine how to define confidence in estimates that are produced. One m ember suggested 
that for certain characteristics that are expected to remain fairly stable (such as BMI), estimated data 
could be checked against expectations, particularly to assess divergences for subgroups. Dr. Earp 
suggested incorporating analytic tool s developed by Dr. Danielle Toth that establish linear benchmarks to 
measure such divergences. Another WG member suggested that complete datasets from the past could be 
8 
 
 
  
  
 
  
   
 
   
  
 
  
 
 
   
   
 
   
 
  
 
   
    
  
  
    
 
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
   used to test estimation models; this approach would not compare data to expectations bu t instead to actual 
past data points. 
Dr. Fay recommended that the same weighting and estimations conducted for the 2017 -2018 data (e.g., 
tract-level estimates of income) be applied to the 2019 -2020 data, in order to ensure that changes are not 
produced by differences in weighting strategy. He noted that completing this step might be necessary to 
answer the WG’s questions about how the estimates would perform. 
Workgroup Discussion of Findings and Next Steps 
Prior to the call, the seminar attendee s received questions to consider in deciding how best to proceed 
with NHANES’ 2019 -2020 cycle. Meeting attendees reviewed these questions as part of their discussion 
of findings. 
What are the implications of combining pre -and post -pandemic data? 
Attendee s affirmed their earlier conclusion that combining pre -and post -pandemic data would amount to 
combining data from 2 different populations and therefore should be avoided. Based on this conclusion, 
attendees agreed that the only option for moving forward w ith the data was to follow some form of 
Option 3: creating a weighted, nationally representative pre -COVID -19 sample. Therefore, attendees 
discussed only those questions pertaining to that option. 
Dr. Paulose reminded the WG that this decision affects the 10 to 15 new measures implemented for the 
first time in the 2019 -2020 survey: these measures cannot be analyzed in relation to any past dataset, 
because for the most part they have no counterpart in those datasets; instead, they would require 
comparison t o post -COVID -19 data. A WG member asked if these measures will likely be affected by the 
pandemic. Dr. Fakhouri explained that some of the measures, such as infant formula use and several 
neurological assessments, may be affected. A WG member suggested tha t this issue will need to be 
revisited pending additional information. Dr. Paulose noted that the NHANES and Westat teams will 
meet with researchers who requested these measures to determine whether they believe the measures 
should be accessible in a combi nation of pre -and post -pandemic data. 
Should the collected data (18 PSUs) be combined with the 2017−2018 data to create a larger dataset? 
Attendees did not come to a consensus on whether to combine the 2017 -2018 and 2019 -2020 datasets. Dr. 
Madans asked w hether it was possible to leave this question unanswered pending development of criteria 
for assessing the combination’s analytic utility and releasing data. Based on this suggestion, Dr. Paulose 
asked the WG members to discuss potential criteria NHANES co uld use to evaluate survey weights for a 
combined 2017 -2020 dataset or to evaluate the 2019 -2020 dataset. WG members did not have suggestions 
during the call. 
However, a WG member noted that combining across survey methods might pose a greater challenge t han 
allowing the 2019 -2020 data to stand alone. Thus, the WG members inquired what method Westat would 
use to combine data (e.g., weighting, small area estimations, synthetic data). WG members suggested that 
testing different methods, or at least consideri ng the applicability of different methods, would help 
identify the best path forward. 
Dr. Fay explained the model proposed thus far for the 2017 -2020 combination. This model begins by 
reverting to the stratification developed for the 2015 -2018 survey. Th e 2019 -2020 PSUs are sorted into 
these 2015 -2018 strata, and then the PSUs within each strata are weighted in comparison to the number of 
PSUs in the same strata in 2017 -2018 (e.g., if 3 PSUs were collected in 2019 -2020 and 4 in 2017 -2018, 
each 2019 -2020 P SU was weighted at 1.33). This approach does not take geography into account. A WG 
9 
 
 
     
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
  
  
    
 
  
  
   
   
   
 
  
 
   
  
   
     
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
 
 member asked Dr. Fay if the team could instead apply the stratification developed for the 2019 -2022 
dataset retrospectively to the 2017 -2018 data. Dr. Fay stated that this a pproach was not possible, because 
it would leave certain strata completely unrepresented in the 2017 -2018 data. 
WG members agreed that Dr. Fay’s approach was reasonable, particularly if it made unit -level weighted 
information available for users to analy ze in a variety of ways. Several members noted that it would be 
possible to build a model -based approach that would extrapolate trends over time, but Dr. Madans shared 
that NCHS would be very unlikely to use the 2019 -2020 data to publish trend analyses; i nstead, it would 
use the data for research only. Thus, she suggested that trend analysis should not shape the approach to 
combining datasets. 
One WG member expressed interest in how other nationally representative surveys have handled data 
collection issu es resulting from the COVID -19 pandemic. Another WG member suggested that studying 
survey responses to other disasters (e.g., Hurricane Katrina) could be informative. For example, the 
National Survey on Drug Use and Health produced a report on its Hurrican e Katrina response. However, 
Dr. Madans noted that natural disasters have not disrupted data collection in the extensive and long -
lasting ways that COVID -19 has. She also confirmed that NHANES has been affected more severely than 
other surveys. 
Should the collected data (18 PSUs) be used as a convenience sample in the RDC? 
A WG member stated that this question depends on how much effort NCHS would like to invest in 
combining, modeling, and weighting data. Dr. Madans noted that NCHS will rely on WG members to 
identify the benefits of each data release option so it can complete the appropriate cost/benefit analysis for 
resource allocation. However, she noted that NCHS is quite likely to release the 2019 -2020 data as a 
convenience sample and can certainly rel ease at least the new measures, in particular, in that fashion. 
Dr. Wagner suggested that the benefits of a convenience sample ultimately depend on NCHS’ users. 
Releasing a convenience sample in the RDC might benefit sophisticated data analysts, who could apply 
adjustment strategies that best align with their specific research goals, but an adjusted and weighted 
sample will be of greatest utility to researchers without that level of statistical skill. A WG member 
agreed and suggested that given the great d eal of effort involved in collecting the extant NHANES data, it 
would be worthwhile to put in the additional effort to make that data as broadly usable as possible, 
including for users who would not as easily be able to make their own adjustments. 
Is there a way to weight the 2019 -2020 data to make it nationally representative? 
The WG agreed that the weighting plan Dr. Fay described is plausible but will need to be tested against 
expectations. One WG member suggested that the likely substantial bias in the unadjusted data makes 
weighting risky but reiterated that it is worthwhile to improve the data’s utility by applying at least the 
same measures used on the 2017 -2018 data. 
Additional comments 
One WG member asked whether ending the 2019 -2020 data coll ection would free resources for additional 
work on the data that has already been collected. Dr. Madans explained that leaving the field has not 
saved NCHS a great deal of money. Dr. Paulose noted that the most important resource is the expertise 
needed to carry out the approaches discussed during the meeting (i.e., synthetic data development, 
weighting, and modeling). 
10 
 
 
     
  
 
  
  
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
  
     
  
   
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
 
    
 
   
 Dr. Madans emphasized that the WG members’ initial discussion was very helpful and she thanked 
members for their opinions. 
PHSPMDP WG Clos ed Session 
Dr. Uddin began the closed session by explaining that the draft meeting summary will be available 
approximately one month after the meeting. Another call can then be scheduled for WG members to 
finalize suggestions. The objective is to have a fi nal draft by September 3 or 4, 2020 to circulate to the 
full BSC. 
Members then reviewed conclusions drawn during the meeting and open questions. 
Synthetic Data 
WG members discussed several problems with synthetic data. Several WG members suggested that i t 
could be prohibitively difficult to produce synthetic data for the number of variables in NHANES 
surveys. One WG member expressed skepticism about offering synthetic rather than observed data within 
the RDC. Other WG members agreed that a model -based app roach would be preferable, although one 
WG member reminded the board that a subset of researchers might not be equipped to employ models; 
for these researchers, a mix of actual and synthetic data that more closely approximates typical survey 
data might be more helpful. By contrast, WG members agreed that producing synthetic data is the only 
way to release some 2019 -2020 data outside the RDC. However, one member argued that even synthetic 
data may create a risk of unintended disclosure, because that data wil l be derived from a fairly small 
sample. Members noted that the NCHS disclosure review board will determine the extent and significance 
of this risk. 
Based on these challenges and uncertainties, WG members ultimately agreed that they do not recommend 
producing synthetic data but believe this approach is worth considering if NCHS wishes to release any 
data publicly. 
Preferred Option 3 Approach 
WG members confirmed that they preferred the Option 3b approach of combining 2017 -2018 and 2019 -
2020 data. This approach provides a larger data collection to create better estimates. 
Preferred Weighting Approach 
WG members agreed that Dr. Fay’s plan to use the 2017 -2018 strata to determine 2019 -2020 weights is 
the best way to begin combining the datasets. This approach can be a starting point for other modeling 
activities and provide a relatively simple way to use the combined data. 
Evaluating the Dataset 
The WG noted that it had expanded the scope of its work to include recommending criteria to evaluate 
adjus tments to the 2019 -2020 dataset. Members agreed that the NHANES and Westat teams should 
minimally test results against historically -based expectations, as was done for the 2017 -2018 dataset. 
They added that WG members can provide guidance as this assessmen t is performed. 
Impact of a Delay in Re -entering the Field 
Dr. Uddin asked whether any of the advice provided by the WG members would change if the NHANES 
survey were unable to re -enter the field in January 2021. WG members agreed that when they receive the 
written meeting report, they should review it from the pe rspective of this question. They 
acknowledged that in this scenario, NHANES may have another reduced sample for 2021 -2022, 
However, they noted that because they have restricted their discussion to Option 3, which handles 
already -completed data collection separately from future data collection, the opinions they formed today 
11 
 
 
    
  
   
  
  
 
   
  
 
    
    
 should not be affected by future delays. WG members suggested noting explicitly noting that the 3B 
approach to the current challenge has this key advantage of allowing the WG to separat ely address 
questions about the 2021 -2022 dataset if the situation changes in any appreciable way. One member also 
suggested explicitly stating that the WG considers it worthwhile to conduct a 2021 -2022 survey if it were 
delayed until May. 
The WG also sug gested that it might be best for NHANES to assume that delays will occur. They noted 
that even surveys reentering the field are unable, given the geography of the pandemic, to do so in all 
planned locations; such challenges may be magnified by the nature o f NHANES’ examinations and 
population. One WG member suggested that the NHANES team might develop a plan to offer tests or 
assessments that could help offset health risks of participation in the survey when it does reenter the field. 
The meeting was adjourned at 4:00 pm. 
12 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 APPENDIX 2 
National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey 
Workgroup Meeting 
National  Center  for  Health  Statistics  (NCHS)  Board  of  
Scientific  Counselors  (BSC)  
Wednesday, May 20, 2020, 9:00am -5:00pm ET 
Zoom Virtual Meeting 
 
  
 
    
    
      
   
 
    
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
   
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
  
   
  
  
 Meeting Summary  
On Wednesday, May 20, 2020, the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey (NAMCS) Workgroup of  
the National Center  for Health Statistics  (NCHS)  Board of Scientific Counselors (BSC) convened a  
virtual meeting of  federal and  nonfederal stakeholders to discuss  the usefulness, relevance, and limitations 
of NAMCS’ design and of  its data collection methods.  
 
Since NAMCS  began in 1973, U.S. ambulatory health care has  changed markedly, with new manners, 
mechanisms, and locations of health care delivery, as well  as new data sources on ambulatory care 
systems. Given these changes, NCHS must  reexamine NAMCS, consider how it  might be 
redesigned/improved, and assess whether and how it should be continued.  
Summary of findings: 
Based on stakeholder input gathered during this meeting, the NAMCS Workgroup formulated its 
conclusions for submission to the BSC at its September 2020 meeting. See Appendix A for the meeting 
agenda, B for the participants list, C for participant poll results reg arding how to define “ambulatory 
health care,” and D for Zoom chat log. The findings that emerged from the discussions follow: 
1. Redesign NAMCS to optimize its present -day function and status as a “gold standard” data 
source on the delivery of ambulatory he alth care in the United States, as well as to serve as a 
potential reference for validation of other ambulatory health care datasets. 
2. Who gets sampled: Definition of ambulatory care needs to be refined to reflect the current state of 
health care delivery. Ambulatory care definition should be refined to reflect that care is being 
provided in more diverse settings by a more diversified workforce. 
3. How sampling occurs: Updat e NAMCS’ sampling frame (e.g., transitioning from physician 
encounters to either provide r groups or sites, or individual patients), in part to better capture the 
role of nonphysician ambulatory health care professionals such as nurse practitioners (NPs) and 
physician assistants (PAs), and to gather data covering the full patient experience. R e-examine 
eligibility for selection of providers as in -scope e.g. clinicians practicing in outpatient settings 
owned by hospitals, but not hospital -based. Institut e a hybrid data collection approach to leverage 
both the speed of electronic data capture (e. g., from EHRs) and the depth derived from manual 
data abstraction, thus balancing the priorities of deep cross -sectional data capture with the unique 
benefits of longitudinal data capture 
4. Data collection period: Increas e the measurement period of data collection to better view real -
time changes in dynamic situations (e.g., the Coronavirus Disease 2019 [COVID -19] pandemic). 
The current methodology (i.e. only 1 week of data collection) results in fluctuations that might be 
artifact. Consider collection one quarter or 12 months of data. (footnote —while the workgroup 
considers that real -time reporting may be possible in the near future, we did not believe the 
technological infrastructure was supportive at this time. However, N CHS should consider this 
potential development in any system redesign.) 
5. Speed of data release: Consider producing quarterly estimates. 
6. What information is collected: Tailor NAMCS’ original design to better characterize the modern, 
dynamic “structure and p rocess” of ambulatory health care delivery in the United States to 
o Account for the increased variation of payers, as well as types and sites of care. 
o Broaden NAMCS’ data collection strategies to adapt to the emergence of technology -
based health care delive ry modes such as telehealth, e -visits, and remote monitoring. 
o Expand the induction interview to better describe the system of ambulatory care delivery. 
7. Increase the value of NAMCS: Restructur e NAMCS data collection to maximize the ability to 
link NAMCS dat a to external datasets to other sources of health information including Centers for 
Medicare & Medicaid [CMS] claims data or proprietary electronic health records [EHRs] data). 
1 
 
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
  
    
   
 
 
 
 
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  
  
 
  
 
  
  
  Welcome and Introductions 
John Lumpkin, BSC Member and Workgroup Chair 
Jennife r Madans, Acting Deputy Director, NCHS 
Sayeedha Uddin, BSC Executive Secretary 
NAMCS Workgroup members introduced themselves and declared their conflicts of interest, as well as 
their special government employee status (wherever relevant). Participant intr oductions and disclosures 
are available in the meeting transcript. 
Brief Overview of NAMCS 
Brian Ward, Division of Health Care Statistics, NCHS 
NAMCS was designed to meet the need for objective, reliable information about the provision and use of 
ambulat ory medical care services in the United States. To meet this purpose, NAMCS uses national 
probability samples to survey and collect patient visit data from office -based physicians and community 
health centers (CHCs). Since its origins in 1973, NAMCS has be come an annual survey that now includes 
data abstraction and computerized data collection. 
All physicians included in the NAMCS sample are classified by the American Medical Association 
(AMA) or American Osteopathic Association (AOA) as primarily engaged in office -based care. In 
addition, they are not employed by the U.S. government; are not interns, residents, or fellows; and are not 
anesthesiologists, radiologists, or pathologists. Captured visits are for medical care. 
Community Health Centers Scope 
CHC providers include physicians, physician assistants (PAs), nurse practitioners (NPs), and certified 
nurse midwives (CNMs). To be included in the NAMCS sample, CHCs must meet one of the following 
criteria: 
• Receive grant funds from the federal government through Section 330 of the Public Health 
Service Act 
• Be a look -alike CHC that meets all the requirements to receive Section 330 grant funding, despite 
not receiving such a grant 
• Be an Urban Indian Health Center 
NAMCS Sampling 
The bullet points b elow summarize sample parameters for physicians and CHCs. 
Physicians 
• Eligibility criteria are applied to AMA and AOA Masterfile databases 
• Sample of 3,000 physicians 
o 2,750 MDs and 250 DOs 
• Approximately 30 visits abstracted from each physician’s records 
CHCs 
• Eligibility criteria are applied to the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) CHC 
database 
• Sample of 104 CHCs 
o 1-3 advanced practice providers within CHC selected 
• Approximately 30 visits abstracted from each CHC provider’s records 
2 
 
  
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
   
   
 
   
  
     
      
  
 
  
    
  
   
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
  
 
 
 NAMCS Strengths 
NAMCS is the only nationally representative survey of physicians and CHCs. It collects visit -level data 
directly from provider sites, including clinical data elements such as patient demographics, diagnoses, 
procedures, medications, immuni zations, laboratory and diagnostic tests, and reasons for visits. Provider 
characteristics can be analyzed either independently or with visit -level data. NAMCS can also include 
sponsored content on timely and relevant health topics (e.g., EHR adoption and interoperability). 
NAMCS Limitations 
Although NAMCS has remained an important data source on the provision of ambulatory care, the 
ambulatory health care system itself has changed since the survey was first fielded. Settings and providers 
of ambulatory c are now include more PAs and NPs, and physicians’ offices have become more complex 
with the growth of health care conglomerates and hospital -owned groups. Moreover, much ambulatory 
care delivery no longer occurs in person. As these changes have proliferate d, ambulatory care data have 
also changed. Providers face increased reporting requirements, and more physicians and CHCs are 
adopting EHRs. As electronic data become more prevalent, so do concerns about data security and 
confidentiality. 
In addition to t hese changes to the ambulatory health care data landscape, NAMCS response rates have 
declined across recent years. During 2018, unweighted physician participation rates were approximately 
41 percent, with unweighted response rates of approximately 37 perce nt. 
As a result of these challenges, the NCHS BSC established the NAMCS Workgroup to help chart the 
future of NAMCS. The Workgroup convened today’s meeting to solicit expert input from a panel of 
knowledgeable federal, academic, and professional stakehold ers. 
Panel Presentations on Discussion Themes by Representatives of Non -Federal Stakeholders 
Kathy Hempstead, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) 
Dr. Hempstead emphasized that ambulatory medical care includes not only traditional visits to 
physicians’ offices, but also visits to retail clinics and urgent care centers, as well as virtual visits. She 
suggested that NAMCS should define the scope of ambulatory care using clinically relevant criteria, as 
opposed to, for example, payer -related cri teria. She also suggested that meeting participants consider what 
types of care to classify as ambulatory ( Appendix C contains the se poll results ); for example, many 
patients now use technology for self -monitoring, yet it remains unclear how this trend has affected 
traditional ambulatory care services. 
Dr. Hempstead also noted the importance of understanding how patients use different forms of 
ambulatory care across time, including how encounters or visits are distributed across different types of 
patient s, and how payers as well as barriers to access affect different populations. She noted that the main 
alternatives to NAMCS for obtaining ambulatory care data are claims (e.g., CMS) and EHR vendors. 
Although claims data are typically more comprehensive t han EHR data, they are also slower to become 
available. Dr. Hempstead expressed a desire for a national -level all -payer claims database (APCD) to 
provide reliable, high -quality, and nationally representative EHR and claims data. 
Lynn Olson, American Acade my of Pediatrics (AAP) 
Dr. Olson stated that NAMCS provides unique, valuable data on trends in pediatric care, noting that how 
and where ambulatory pediatric care is delivered continues to evolve. She highlighted the importance of 
valid, reliable, and gene ralizable data to capture these trends, and stressed the need to balance tradeoffs 
between capturing trends and ensuring validity of measures. She also noted the need for NAMCS to 
capture multiple measures that can be used for triangulation across survey, clinical, claims, and EHR data. 
One example of a unique dataset provided for AAP by NAMCS is trends in length of pediatric primary 
care office visits between 2005 and 2015. 
3 
 
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
   
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
   
   
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
  
   
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
  Christine Pintz, George Washington University (GWU) School of Nursing 
Dr. Pintz no ted that NAMCS is medically oriented and that health care has become more expansive. She 
suggested that modern modes of ambulatory care could be better captured by adopting a patient -centered 
perspective, at least for a portion of NAMCS. Such a perspective could more holistically account for care 
components such as patient engagement, prevention practices, health promotion, lifestyle management, 
social determinants of health, behavioral health, and alternative health practices. Dr. Pintz also 
highlighted th at ambulatory care is increasingly team -based and not tied to one particular provider, 
reinforcing the argument that the NAMCS sampling frame should be modified to focus on patients rather 
than physicians. 
Dr. Pintz noted that important gaps currently li mit the utility of NAMCS: (1) lack of longitudinal data and 
external linkages to other surveys and (2) failure to distinguish between different nursing roles (e.g., NP 
versus nurse midwife, and registered nurse [RN] versus licensed practical nurse [LPN]). She also 
mentioned various tradeoffs between electronic versus manual data abstraction: although electronic 
abstraction is fast, seamless, and cost -effective, and can offer larger sample sizes, manual abstraction 
tends to provide higher -quality data. 
Ryan White, Rutgers University 
Dr. White noted that no nationally representative dataset captures the clinical activities of PAs, even as 
that profession continues to grow rapidly. Approximately 40 percent of PAs report their primary work 
setting to be office -based private practices, and approximately 26 percent of PAs work in primary care. 
Further, CHCs employ 2 -3 percent of the PA workforce nationwide, and since 2018 have employed PAs, 
NPs, and certified midwives at higher rates than physicians. Lacking a nat ionally representative data set 
on PAs, researchers find it difficult to characterize this workforce and to analyze outcomes associated 
with their delivery of ambulatory care services. 
The lack of a Masterfile challenges researchers’ ability to collect a nd work with PA data. Although the 
National Commission on Certification of PAs maintains a database on all certified PAs, it is incomplete, 
making it difficult for researchers to identify PAs who fall within the sampling frames of NAMCS and 
other surveys. PAs who do fall within the NAMCS sampling frame may not have the authority to 
determine whether they participate in the survey. In addition, administrative, billing, or claims data 
sometimes attribute PA visits to physicians (e.g., if a physician’s Nation al Provider Identifier [NPI] 
number is used to code for billing) —further complicating study of this workforce. 
Dr. White suggested that NAMCS capture PA practice specialty to supplement other data sources and to 
offer a more comprehensive picture of the PA workforce. NAMCS could also develop a partnership with 
professional organizations such as the American Academy of PAs to identify those PAs who could 
participate in a redesigned NAMCS. 
Dr. White noted that a redesigned NAMCS should aim to characterize the who, what, when, and where of 
ambulatory medical services; identify access and outcome disparities; and investigate the quality of 
ambulatory medical care to help inform health policy decisions. The COVID -19 pandemic may well 
precipitate certain perman ent changes to ambulatory care, and NAMCS could provide a valuable window 
into the nature of those changes. 
4 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
 
   
  
 
    
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
     
  
  
  
 
 
   
 
  
   
 
 
 
 
 Workgroup Question and Answer Period 
Discussions during the Question and Answer period focused on adjusting the sampling frame and 
increasing response rates. 
Sampling Frame 
Panelists revisited Dr. Pintz’ suggestion to organize the NAMCS sampling frame around patients rather 
than providers. This reframing would help NAMCS capture all modes of patient interaction with 
ambulatory health care services, including with nonphysician providers, as well as virtual health care 
delivery mechanisms such as telehealth and self -monitoring apps. Dr. Copela nd recommended combining 
the provider and patient perspectives, such as how the Medicare Current Beneficiary Survey both 
interviews Medicare beneficiaries and acquires claims data. 
Dr. Hempstead suggested that the sampling frame limitations could also be addressed by modernizing the 
definition of providers to include both nonphysicians (e.g., NPs and PAs) and physicians who have 
traditionally been considered out of scope for nonclinical reasons (e.g., affiliated with an academic 
institution or tech nically employed by a hospital). Other panelists noted that NAMCS could move toward 
the framework increasingly adopted by payers, in which ambulatory care is conceptualized in terms of 
episodes rather than visits —that is, one episode corresponds to all enc ounters a patient has with health 
systems in order to address a particular concern or condition. 
To inform strategies to better capture the roles of nonphysician providers to outpatient care, Dr. Lumpkin 
suggested consulting licensing board records. Howev er, Drs. Pintz and White noted that such records may 
not provide equal value across professional categories (e.g., they provide clinical specialty information on 
NPs but not on PAs). 
Dr. Alexander suggested that modifications to the NAMCS physician induct ion interview could improve 
identification of NPs and PAs in ambulatory health care practices, which could then inform adjustments 
to NAMCS’ sampling frame. 
Response Rates 
Participants also discussed potential strategies to increase NAMCS response rates, such as changing 
which providers are asked to participate or providing incentives to participate. Dr. Olson proposed that 
NCHS test various strategies on NAMCS subsamples before broadly implementing any one strategy. Dr. 
Hempstead noted that Medical Expen diture Panel Survey (MEPS) researchers modified the MEPS 
sampling frame to solicit practice -level information from practice managers, which led to increased 
response rates. 
Discussion of Presentations with Professional Organization and University Panel 
NAMCS Workgroup and Non -Federal Panel Members 
Following nonfederal panelist presentations and NAMCS Workgroup questions, participants addressed 
five questions about a NAMCS redesign, under the theme “understanding the gap between the ambulatory 
health care data that are needed versus what data are available.” 
Question 1: What is the scope of ambulatory medical care in the U nited States (i.e., should 
telemedicine, retail clinics, visits to nonphysicians be included in the scope)? What scope should be 
include d in NAMCS? 
Participants raised telemedicine, home visits, and out -of-scope practices (i.e., those in which a physician 
is employed by a hospital, an urgent care facility, or a retail clinic, mobile clinic, work -based clinic, 
5 
 
    
  
 
 
 
 
  
    
  
 
 
      
 
 
 
  
 
   
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
  
    
  
  
 
  
  
  
 
  
 
 
 
 
  specialty clinic, or perhaps an ambulatory surgical clinic) as potential directions for expanding the scope 
of NAMCS. They reiterated the need to capture contributions of nonphysician providers, especially PAs, 
NPs, and certified nurse midwives. 
Question 2: What information is neede d on the ambulatory health care system in the U nited States ? 
What is the biggest contribution that NAMCS could make? 
Participants reemphasized earlier sentiments that NAMCS “cannot be everything to everybody” and 
therefore must be designed to fulfill a sp ecific function (i.e., to fill a specific data gap in the health data 
landscape). Dr. O’Malley noted that NAMCS’ role in capturing the contents of ambulatory health care 
encounters (i.e., patients’ diagnoses, conditions, complaints) continues to be vitally important, adding that 
a NAMCS redesign could also focus on capturing continuity of care (e.g., from primary care physicians to 
specialists). Dr. Phillips reinforced Dr. O’Malley’s desire for continuity -of-care, and they both agreed that 
this could be don e in a cross -sectional way (e.g., by asking providers or patients how long they have been 
in contact). However, Dr. Phillips also noted that NAMCS’ survey data could be supplemented with 
longitudinal EHR data. Dr. Phillips noted that NAMCS should capture r elationships between trends in the 
provision of ambulatory care and patient outcomes , and Dr. Copeland stated that the complications of 
longitudinal data capture could be mitigated by following a NAMCS subsample longitudinally. 
Dr. Olson recommended that N AMCS strive for maximum generalizability —capturing a limited set of 
high-validity markers that can be linked to external data sources and used to triangulate answers to a wide 
range of research questions that no single survey can answer. Dr. Alexander, how ever, echoed an earlier 
comment that NAMCS’ most important contribution is its capture of the structure and process (from the 
Donabedian model of measuring quality of care in terms of structure , process , and outcome ) of 
ambulatory care in the United States . Dr. Aparasu noted that physician induction interviews could be 
redesigned to capture key elements of the structure of ambulatory health care. He also stressed that 
NAMCS already excels at capturing the process of care and that its depth as a cross -sectional survey is a 
vital asset; he cautioned that an attempt to transform NAMCS into a longitudinal survey could thus 
undermine its key strength. 
Dr. Lumpkin suggested that NAMCS capture more granular payment information so that researchers and 
policymakers can explore, for example, the impacts of high -deductible plans on provision of ambulatory 
care services, and the differences in health care usage among patients with different payment sources 
(e.g., Medicare Fee-for-Service versus Medicare Advantage). He also proposed the use of NAMCS data 
to compare various payment arrangements (i.e., value -based purchasing) to help view the structure of 
ambulatory care delivery. However, Dr. Alexander commented that MEPS an d other data sources (both 
public and proprietary) are better suited to that aim. 
Dr. White proposed that NAMCS capture practice -level information regarding Accountable Care 
Organization (ACO) participation to help inform users of organizational and stru ctural models of 
payment, as well as practice -level information regarding timeliness or accessibility of care (e.g., time to 
next appointment). 
Question 3: What sources of ambulatory health care data exist outside of NAMCS? 
Participants acknowledged the following non -NAMCS sources of ambulatory health care data: EHRs, 
CMS/claims data (public and proprietary), other federally sponsored surveys (e.g., MEPS). 
6 
 
  
 
 
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
    
  
   
 
 
   
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
    
 
   
  
 
 
  
  
    
  
 
  Question 4: What are the strengths and limitations of those sources compared to NAMCS? 
MEPS ex cels at providing granular financial and payer information, whereas CMS claims data are best 
for viewing information on procedures and procedure -specific costs. EHRs enable fast and easy data 
extraction —including longitudinal data —but lack the depth of cro ss-sectional surveys such as NAMCS. 
NAMCS captures provider -level encounter information, which provides better data richness, but misses 
longitudinal patterns and neglects ambulatory health care encounters that do not involve a physician. Dr. 
Kurtzman note d that NAMCS also enables sub -sampling of CHCs, which researchers have used to study 
differences in quality of care among provider types. Dr. Copeland noted that NAMCS could benefit from 
directly linking diagnosis and medication information, as MEPS and IQ VIA already do. Dr. Stafford 
identified slow data releases as a major weakness of NAMCS, and participants highlighted NAMCS’ 
inability to show local -level information. 
Question 5: What gaps exist between the information needed and information available o n the 
ambulatory medical care system? 
Dr. Radhakrishnan highlighted that NAMCS lacks information on mental and behavioral health issues 
(e.g., depression, abuse, comorbidities, substance misuse/dependence) and the requisite services provided 
(e.g., screen ing, treatment, and counseling). 
Participants reiterated earlier comments about NAMCS’ inability to adequately capture patient encounters 
with NPs, PAs, and other nonphysician providers. Dr. Phillips suggested modification of NAMCS’ 
starting sampling str ategy (i.e., going beyond the AMA and AOA Masterfile) to address this issue and the 
previously mentioned issue of physicians being designated out of scope. He also hypothesized that such 
adjustments to NAMCS’ sampling strategy may improve response rates; D r. Chai suggested that response 
rates could also be improved by offering a nonmonetary incentive to participate, such as a certification. 
Participants noted that revising NAMCS’ sampling strategy may enable capture of telehealth visits, which 
have become m uch more common during the COVID -19 pandemic (this change in the process of 
ambulatory health care delivery may have permanent effects following the pandemic). Moreover, as the 
pandemic spreads and vertical integrations continue to occur across the health care industry, NAMCS 
could help to track the composition of the ambulatory health care provider workforce. 
Dr. Chai suggested that NAMCS include anesthesiologists who serve in ambulatory pain clinics. 
Panel Presentations on Discussion Themes by Represen tatives from Federal Agency Stakeholders 
Joel Cohen, Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) 
Dr. Cohen highlighted the comparative lack of available data on the supply (i.e., provider) side of 
ambulatory health care delivery relative to the deman d (i.e., patient) side. The relative lack of supply -side 
data stymies efforts to generate and validate predictive models of provider -side ambulatory care. This 
lack of models, in turn, challenges the health care system in the context of emerging crises, su ch as the 
COVID -19 pandemic (e.g., public health experts/policymakers cannot determine whether provider 
capacity can meet the demand for care, whether prices will rise, or how changing demand may jeopardize 
the financial security of provider groups). 
Dr. Cohen also noted that laboratories providing services associated with ambulatory care are frequently 
omitted from surveys and other data collection efforts, despite playing a major role in the delivery of such 
care. He acknowledged the difficulty of captu ring the many elements of ambulatory health care in a single 
survey and stated that the NAMCS team should select which elements of the system to target for data 
collection —or split its efforts across several surveys. The structure of ambulatory health care is quickly 
changing as hospitals purchase small physicians’ practices, while others merge. Current data collection 
efforts neglect these changes. 
7 
 
  
  
 
   
    
 
     
 
  
 
  
   
  
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
   
   
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
 
 
 
  
     
 
 
 
   
  
  
   Dr. Cohen also highlighted the tradeoff between attaining rich data and achieving high response rates. 
Providers often lack time to complete a dense survey, and although previous efforts to streamline surveys 
have effectively raised response rates, the resulting data are limited. However, in some cases it may be 
feasible to ask different types of questions of d ifferent respondents, thereby maintaining data richness 
without increasing respondent burden (e.g., asking providers to provide clinical information while asking 
practice managers or office managers to provide financial data). In general, NAMCS may benefit from 
adopting mixed methods for data collection (e.g., electronic EHR data extraction combined with provider 
surveys). 
Finally, Dr. Cohen advocated for increased linkages between NAMCS and other federal surveys, using 
the example of the National Health Interview Survey’s (NHIS) linkage to MEPS (i.e., MEPS’ sample is 
selected from NHIS respondents, which facilitates easy and efficient linkage). 
Sharon Arnold, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation (ASPE) 
Dr. Arnold highlight ed NAMCS’ role as a gold standard reference to validate other supply -side 
ambulatory health care datasets. She reinforced Dr. Cohen’s point that many sources exist for demand -
side ambulatory care data (e.g., EHRs, surveys, registries, and claims databases) . Thus, NAMCS can 
serve a vital role by providing detailed data on the organizational structure of the ambulatory health care 
system. Dr. Arnold also echoed earlier comments about increasing the scope of NAMCS to include more 
types of providers. 
Dr. Arno ld cautioned the Workgroup against undervaluing NAMCS, because most of the existing data 
sources on ambulatory health lack representative samples. NAMCS’ representative dataset can serve as a 
benchmark against which policymakers can gauge the validity of o ther datasets, which they must consult 
to inform more urgent policy choices (i.e., because these other sources can release data on a faster 
timeframe than NAMCS). 
Dr. Arnold also emphasized that NAMCS could be redesigned to help capture local variations in 
ambulatory health care delivery. Although granular local -level data are challenging to generate, they can 
provide crucial context for policymakers. 
Alek Sripipatana, HRSA 
Dr. Sripipatana praised NAMCS for providing data that HRSA can use to compare ca re delivery practices 
across CHCs and other ambulatory care providers (e.g., primary care clinics). NAMCS also allows HRSA 
to develop strategies for improving CHCs (e.g., by evaluating variability in EHR adoption across sites). 
Talisha Searc y, Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) 
Dr. Searcy echoed earlier comments on the potential for NAMCS to capture the many changes occurring 
within the organizational structure of ambulatory health care delivery, as well a s on the need for greater 
linkages between NAMCS and other surveys and data sources. She also highlighted efforts such as the 
Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement, which was spurred by the 21st Century Cures 
Act, to help foster health informatio n exchange among health information networks. Such efforts could 
potentially provide a window into site -specific EHR data that have previously been unobtainable. 
Lucie Dalzell, Census Bureau 
Dr. Dalzell reinforced an earlier comment that it is often the o ffice manager, rather than the physician, 
who decides whether to participate in NAMCS. The office manager of a physician practice may 
determine that the time required to complete NAMCS imposes an unnecessary business burden with no 
measurable benefit in te rms of care, and therefore decide not to participate. If NAMCS were marketed as 
8 
 
   
  
  
 
 
   
    
    
    
   
 
 
 
   
 
  
 
   
  
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
  
 
 
 a resource to improve care, in addition to a scientific resource, it could attain higher response rates, a 
larger user base, and improved data quality. Response rates and data quality may also be improved by 
increasing job satisfaction of NAMCS’ field representatives. 
Dr. Dalzell also addressed the comparative advantages/drawbacks of manual versus automatic data 
abstraction. The Census Bureau has used both methods, and Dr. Dal zell was surprised that some Census 
Bureau regional offices were unhappy when abstraction was conducted remotely, whereas others were 
pleased at the simplified process as long as field representatives remained available to answer questions 
or provide suppo rt. Dr. Dalzell used this example to highlight the fact that different respondents will have 
different preferences, and that tradeoffs between data collection modes and their effects on response rates 
should be carefully considered. Finally, she noted that large organizations tend to prefer that data 
collectors approach them once at the organization level with a list of desired respondents. 
Workgroup Question and Answer Period 
Dr. Cohen suggested potential strategies for establishing greater NAMCS linkage s, for example by 
surveying physicians and practices that participate in NHIS or MEPS, or by selecting a NAMCS sample 
based on the sample of another survey to inform next -year nonresponse adjustments. He also suggested 
linking NAMCS to administrative data (e.g., from CMS or private claims). 
Dr. Phillips suggested that HRSA’s sampling of Federally Qualified Health Centers (FQHCs) link to the 
Uniform Data System (UDS) or to one of the Community Health Applied Research Networks (CHARNs) 
in order to incorporat e more data about the site encountered by the respondent. An EHR linkage could 
also fulfill this function. 
Participants discussed linkage of clinical NAMCS data with financial MEPS data. If one survey attempts 
to gather both types of data, data richness will likely decrease. Participants stressed the importance of 
establishing linkages during survey design rather than post hoc. 
Dr. Searcy noted that ONC has worked to develop regulatory guidance around protected health 
information (PHI) to ensure that th e Trusted Exchange Framework and Common Agreement is aligned 
with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA). This guidance provides 
regulations on patient privacy and consent, and on other health information governed by HIPAA, 
effecti vely standardizing the rules of health information exchange. ONC is also developing data standards 
to facilitate more efficient bulk data abstraction from multiple providers and practices. 
Discussion of Presentations with Federal Agency Panel 
NAMCS Workgroup and Federal Panel Members 
Following federal panelist presentations and NAMCS Workgroup questions, participants discussed five 
questions about a potential NAMCS redesign, under the theme “aligning NAMCS to meet existing and 
future needs for data o n the U.S. ambulatory health care system.” 
Question 1: What is the purpose of NAMCS (e.g., reference versus repository)? 
Dr. Alexander and others shared their view of NAMCS as an authoritative source of information about 
the provision of ambulatory care in the United States (i.e., as a benchmark). Dr. Alexander noted that 
validation of other datasets does not seem to be its primary utility for users. Dr. Chai reiterated NAMCS’ 
primary value as a reference standard and cautioned participants against compro mising that value by 
collecting too many types of data simultaneously or by transforming NAMCS into a longitudinal dataset. 
She also noted that NAMCS could potentially expand its focus on softer data types that are unavailable 
through claims databases (i.e ., smoking status, family history). 
9 
 
   
 
     
  
 
  
   
   
    
     
 
 
   
 
  
   
      
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
     
  
  
  
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
    
 
  
 
 Question 2: What are the goals, objectives , and added value of a redesigned NAMCS? 
Dr. Aparasu framed the goal of a redesigned NAMCS as better capture of the breadth as well as the depth 
of ambulatory health care deliv ery in the United States by collecting data that other sources do not (e.g., 
in terms of breadth, what proportion of visits were to urgent care versus CHCs, office -based practices, 
and hospital outpatient departments?) —and in such a way that they can then be linked to those other 
sources. Dr. Cohen expressed a similar desire to distinguish among types of ambulatory care sites but 
cautioned that these distinctions can be ambiguous (e.g., a patient may classify the site as a community 
clinic, although it may be billed as an emergency department because of its affiliation with a hospital). 
Dr. Copeland reemphasized earlier comments on capturing ambulatory care encounters with nonphysician 
providers such as NPs and PAs —possibly by sampling at the site level —as well as telecare and other 
virtual ambulatory health encounters (e.g., via self -monitoring apps). He also proposed an increased focus 
on the collection of ancillary information, such as which providers become involved in caring for a 
patient after a primary physician’s initial diagnosis. 
Dr. Kurtzman stressed that NCHS must determine which features of NAMCS should remain unchanged 
to maintain its ability to track health care trends from past decades to the future. Dr. O’Malley advocated 
for mainta ining most of NAMCS’ current content as well as its design. 
Question 3: What changes are needed for NAMCS to address the gaps in the information needed on the 
U.S. ambulatory medical care system (possibilities for linkage to other data sets or longitudin al data 
collection)? 
Dr. Dalzell explained that the NAMCS out -of-scope rate is approximately 40 percent, which impacts the 
data generated in unknown ways. Contributing to that high rate are the 2 percent of physicians in the 
NAMCS sample who are deceased and another 15 percent who are retired. Therefore, NAMCS should 
update the sampling frame and validate that each individual targeted for the sample is still practicing . 
Question 4: How can validity and reliability of a redesigned NAMCS be assessed (i.e., what data sources 
can be used to validate the sampling frame or a subset of the frame, can EHR data be used to verify or 
supplement responses to clinical questions)? 
Dr. Phillips reiterated earlier comments about the potential to use EHR and MEPS data, a s well as data 
from specialist certification boards and from the American Board of Family Medicine’s (ABFM) annual 
cross -sectional census of family physicians, to help validate a redesigned NAMCS. Dr. Alexander noted 
the common practice of assessing data q uality/validity by using proprietary visit -based audits but 
questioned the value of using claims data given the many differences in what information is captured. 
Several Workgroup members noted that despite the potential value of validating NAMCS data with 
EHRs, the level of EHR implementation and the corresponding richness of data collection varies widely 
by ambulatory care site. 
Question 5: Which data collection methods (e.g., electronic vs. manual abstraction) should be used for 
NAMCS? 
Participants ge nerally favored a mixed method that leverages both the richness of data from manual 
abstraction and the speed of electronic abstraction of data such as the number and types of prescriptions 
written by particular physicians or practices. In addition, electr onic abstraction can help to reduce 
NAMCS’ respondent burden and thus improve response rates. Dr. White agreed that a hybrid approach 
presents clear benefits but cautioned against heavy reliance on EHR data, which often masks the 
10 
 
  
 
   
   
   
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 contributions of nonphysic ian providers to patient care. Dr. Stafford agreed, adding that data integrity 
within various EHR systems may not be well -validated. 
Dr. Copeland proposed a two -stage collection model, wherein NAMCS first collects EHR data via rapid 
electronic abstraction, then collects more in -depth data via manual abstraction to fill in key gaps. Dr. 
Aparasu endorsed this hybrid model, noting that it may not only increase the NAMCS sample size, but 
also accelerate the timeline for release of EHR -derived data —addressing co ncerns about slow periodicity 
of data release. 
Dr. Dalzell stressed that NCHS’ deliberations about increased electronic data abstraction in NAMCS 
should consider the importance of maintaining relationships between field representatives and survey 
responde nts. 
Workgroup Next Steps 
NAMCS Workgroup 
Following receipt of this meeting summary, members of the NAMCS Workgroup will use input from 
nonfederal and federal panelists to help develop a set of recommendations to the BSC for a potential 
NAMCS redesign. 
Adjournment 
John Lumpkin, BSC Member and Wo rkgroup Chair 
Dr. Lumpkin adjourned the meeting. 
11 
 
  
 
 Appendix A: Meeting Agenda 
12 
 
  -John to monitor the 
chat screen. 
-Share Sayeedha's 
screen so she can take 
notes that will display 
on the shared screen 
12:00 Summary of key messages John Lumpkin John will likely be the 
from discussion with non- only one speaking 
Federal panel 
12:15 Lunch break Please remind 
everyone to mute 
audio and turn off 
video/webcam 
13:15 Panel presentations on Joel Cohen, AHRQ Only WG members to 
discussion themes by Sharon Arnold, ASPE ask questions of 
representatives from Fed era I Alek Sripipatana, HRSA presenters in th is 
agency stakeholders Talisha Searcy, ONC session 
14:15 Break Please remind 
everyone to mute 
audio and turn off 
video/webcam 
14:30 Discussion of presentations NAMCS Workgroup and Federal panel -Attendees will use 
with Federal agency panel members "raise hand" feature 
to ask to speak, Greg 
Richards (RLA) will 
monitor the raise 
hand function and 
send private message 
to John. 
-John to monitor the 
chat screen. 
-Share Sayeedha's 
screen so she can take 
notes that will display 
on the shared screen 
15:45 Summary of key messages John Lumpkin John will likely be the 
from discussion with Federal only one speaking 
agency panel 
16:00 Workgroup Discussion of NAMCS Workgroup Only 5 WG members 
Findings and Sayeedha for this 
session-other 
participants should be 
ta ken off the ca II 
17:00 Adjournment John Lumpkin 
13 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NCHS Attendees  
Brian Moyer, Director, NCHS  
Jennifer Madans, Acting Deputy Director, NCHS  
Denys Lau, Director, Division of Health Care Statistics  
Carol DeFrances, Deputy Director, Division of Health Care Statistics  
Brian Ward, Chief, Ambulatory and Hospital Care Branch, Division of Health Care Statistics  
Sayeedha Uddin, Designated Federal Officer, Board of  Scientific Counselors, NCHS  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Appendix B: Participants List 
NAMCS WORKGROUP MEETING MAY 20, 2020 PARTICIPANT LIST 
BSC NCHS NAMCS Workgroup Members 
John Lumpkin, Workgroup Chair, BSC Member, Blue Cross Blue Shield of North Carolina 
Caleb Alexander, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health 
Rajender Aparasu, Univers ity of Houston , College of Pharmacy 
Ken Copeland, BSC Member, NORC 
Bob Phillips, American Academy of Family Medicine 
Non-federal Participants 
Sarah Baizer, National Association of Community Health Centers* 
Jean Fuglesten Biniek, Health Care Cost Institute 
Elizabeth Hausman, American College of Preventive Medicine 
Kathy Hempstead, Robert Wood Johnson Foundation* 
Ellen Kurtzman, George Washington University School of Nursing 
Lynn Olson, American Academy of Pediatrics* 
Ann O’Malley, Mathematica 
Darrell Philpo t, IQVIA 
Christine Pintz, George Washington University School of Nursing* 
Randy Stafford, Stanford University 
Ryan White, Rutgers University* 
Federal Participants  
Sharon Arnold, ASPE*  
Grace Chai, FDA  
Joel Cohen, AHRQ*  
Lucinda Dalzell, Census   
Eloise Parker, Census  
Eric Miller, NIH  
Alek Sripipatana, HRSA*  
Talisha Searcy, ONC*  
*Panelists 
14 
 
   
  
 
      
 
     
      
     
      
      
     
     
     
      
     
     
      
     
     
     
     
     
     
     
      
     
     
     
     
     
      
     
     
     
     
       
     
     
     
      
      
 
     Appendix C: Participant Poll Results 
Participants were asked to complete an informal poll indicating whether they consider various aspects of 
health care as falling within the ‘ambulatory care’ category. Results of this p oll are summarized below. 
Note that the poll was not asking whether NAMCS should capture all care modes categorized as 
‘ambulatory care’. 
# # % % 
Yes No Yes No 
Nurse managed health centers 22 2 92% 8% 
Urgicare centers 21 3 88% 13% 
Ambulatory surgery treatment centers 15 9 63% 38% 
Indian Health Centers 24 0 100% 0% 
Health Departments 15 9 63% 38% 
CHCs 24 0 100% 0% 
Workplace clinics 12 12 50% 50% 
University Clinics 20 4 83% 17% 
FQHCs 23 1 96% 4% 
Home 12 12 50% 50% 
Telemedicine telephone based 19 3 86% 14% 
Mobile Care 16 6 73% 27% 
Telemedicine e mail 15 7 68% 32% 
Urgent care 20 2 91% 9% 
Primary care practice site 22 0 100% 0% 
Specialty care practice site 21 1 95% 5% 
Telemedicine office based 22 0 100% 0% 
Specialty clinic 21 1 95% 5% 
Retail clinic 19 3 86% 14% 
Telemedicine and non -office based 18 4 82% 18% 
Physical Therapy Centers 11 12 48% 52% 
Pharmacy 11 12 48% 52% 
Hospital owned clinics 23 0 100% 0% 
Managed care centers 22 1 96% 4% 
Student Health Centers 20 3 87% 13% 
Hospital outpatient clinics 22 1 96% 4% 
Other clinical sites (Optometry, audiology, spirometry) 11 12 48% 52% 
Dental Offices 11 12 48% 52% 
Dental Clinics 10 13 43% 57% 
Chiropractic Care Sites 10 13 43% 57% 
App-provided care 14 13 52% 48% 
Home based monitoring 11 16 41% 59% 
Complementary and Alternative Care Clinics 17 10 63% 37% 
Community based clinics 27 0 100% 0% 
Behavioral health clinics 24 3 89% 11% 
15 
 
   
   
  
    
  
   
   
  
  
  
 
 
   
  
   
    
  
 
 
  
  
   
 
 
    
  
     
 
     
 
   
 
      
  
 
 
   
      
  Appendix D: Zoom Chat Log 
00:41:35 Rajender Aparasu -University of Houston: Good Morning All 
00:42:21 Sayeedha Uddin --NCHS: Good morning! 
00:44:41 John Lumpkin BCBSNC Foundation: Good morning to all, thank you for pa rticipating 
01:22:42 Sayeedha Uddin --NCHS: Reminder --Please add your name affiliation to your name or 
phone number in the Zoom participants list. Thanks! 
01:24:31 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Small Independent practices remain 36% of practices where 
family phys icians work, and where more than half of family physicians practices. I agree 
with Dr. Olson that this has been changing, and the pandemic may speed that up 
01:28:20 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Given the reliance on NAMCS by researchers like Dr. Olson, 
I am interested in her reaction to Dr. Dalzell's revelation that In 2018, the physician 
response rate was 46.2% and the physician out -of-scope rate was 42%.  In 2019, the 
physician response rate was 29.6% and the out -of-scope rate was 41.4%.  
01:31:17 Sayeedha Uddin --NCHS: Reminder --Please add your name affiliation to your name or 
phone number in the Zoom participants list. Thanks! 
01:37:18 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Ryan White also raised the issue of sampling and correctly 
identifying NPs and PAs with the added goals of better understanding of ambulatory care, 
professional differentiation, better understanding of teams in care, and more correctly 
identifying their practice spe cialties. For example the RN Sample Survey NP data from 
2018 are not generally available yet, but GWU researchers recently said that it suggests 
NPs in primary care are less than 30% of the NP workforce. We really can't afford to be 
so blind to work of hea lth professionals in ambulatory care. 
01:44:16 Amy Blum NCHS: Can the PA participation in an encounter be determined by the 
provider ID #? 
01:45:08 Ann O'Malley, Mathematica: If the PA bills under their own NPI yes. But if they work 
"incident to" a physici an, then I don't think so. 
01:46:49 Jeannie Fuglesten Biniek, Health Care Cost Institute: This is a limitation of claims 
data when examining the role and activities of PAs and NPs 
01:47:16 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Perhaps for Christine: 10. Is ther e an NP 
or CNM “Masterfile”, or are the challenges very similar to those of capturing PAs? 
01:48:01 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: General query for panelists: Could induction interview 
be expanded so as to yield more comprehensive information about impo rtant dimensions 
of care that are currently not well captured (e.g., provision of telehealth, models of team -
based care)? 
01:49:35 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: I think we’ll be hearing from colleagues from the 
Census later about some considerations reg arding sampling groups rather than providers -
which is quite relevant to issue of capturing advanced practice providers 
01:54:26 Ryan White -Rutgers University: To support what's been said by others, PAs can bill 
under their own NPI for many payers, but not all. In addition, if incident -to billing is 
used, the PA would be "hidden" in the claims data. I think this emphasizes the 
16 
 
   
 
   
 
  
  
  
 
   
 
 
      
 
   
 
    
  
  
     
 
 
   
 
 
  
 
     
 
  
  
  
    
 
  
 
     
  
 
   
  
    
    importance of seeking methods to capture outcomes associated with teams rather than 
individual providers. 
01:55:18 Ellen Kurtzma n: Greetings!  A quick note regarding a NP/midwife masterfile --the state 
Boards of Nursing maintain license information.  So, collectively, they would have a 
census of all licensed APRNs including NPs and midwives. 
01:56:21 Christine Pintz -George Wash ington University: Nurse practitioners are being 
encouraged by national NP organizations to bill under their own NPI and not incident to. 
However, this is often the decision by the practice and not the individual NP. 
01:57:54 Christine Pintz -George Washi ngton University: The American Association of Nurse 
Practitioners (AANP) has approximately 180,000 members which is about half of all NPs 
in this country. A combination of state boards of nursing and AANP may help identify 
those NPs. 
01:58:47 Caleb Alexand er -Johns Hopkins: Is it fair to say that three strategies to increase 
capture of care delivered by non -physician providers (while preserving general NAMCS 
design) are to sample them; expand their capture on induction form; and/or expand their 
capture on visit form? 
01:59:27 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Christine, since NPPES now captures more than 90% of 
NPs, could it be a viable sampling mechanism if NCHS doesn't move to practice 
sampling. I know NPPES has challenges, but it could get around incident -to limit ations 
of using claims data. Your experience would be valuable in understanding the limitations 
02:01:53 Christine Pintz -George Washington University: It could be  -there are some issues with 
individual questions but it could be helpful. At NONPF, we ar e trying to look into 
creating a minimum data set for NPs. 
02:02:06 Ryan White -Rutgers University: Caleb, I agree with these strategies. Even 
beyond PAs and NPs, I think about visits that may have involved a mental health 
professional who is co -located in the same practice. Perhaps the induction form could be 
amended to capture other members of the team who participated in the encounter or the 
proximate care of that patient. 
02:02:13 Amy Blum NCHS: A modifier to the CPT code indicating a NP or PA was the 
provider could be an option. 
02:07:05 Randall Stafford: I think that attempts to capture different professional groups 
misses the point.  We need to capture the whole patient experience, not the individual 
slices provided by different types of providers. 
02:08:20 Christine Pintz -George Washington University: Caleb -I also agree and agree with 
Ryan about other types of providers. With the movement to Patient Centered Medical 
Homes, there are other providers that are important to patient care -PTs, pharm acists, 
social workers, nurse care coordinators. 
02:37:56 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: If not [a modified] NAMCS, what ARE the currently 
available federally supported surveys/studies that are most optimal to assess team -based 
care? 
03:06:04 Bob Philli ps, ABFM CPV: UDS Data have been helpful for understanding team 
constructs and outcomes for FQHCs, but NAMCS should be the source for broader 
settings. The American Board of Family Medicine has modelled a lot of its cross -
sectional annual census of family physicians (~12,000/year) to model NAMCS questions 
17 
 
    
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
  
    
 
    
    
    
 
     
  
   
  
   
  
  
     
    
  
  
   
 
    
        
   
   
   
  
   
   
   
  
    
 
  
  
 about teams, practice ownership, EHR functionality and have been using that as a lens on 
the settings and systems where they work. 
03:21:10 Randall Stafford, MD, PhD, Stanford University: There is a grea t need to capture the 
nuances of "telehealth." No one has fully delved into the different types of 
communications that are implied by this broad term.  Different types of video, telephone, 
messaging, email, app contact.  
03:24:20 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: E HR and claims data would potentially capture telehealth 
since it is typically captured in the course of care in the EHR for billing purposes and 
submitted with that E&M code or modifier 
03:27:59 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Here are notes on potential changes for NAMCS to 
address gaps: 
03:28:03 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: (1) Could induction interview be expanded so as to 
yield more comprehensive information about important dimensions of care that are 
currently not well captured (e.g., provision of telehealth, models of team -based care)? (2) 
Could sample frame be expanded so as to separately sample PAs and NPs? (3) Could 
definition of visits be broadened so as to allow for capture of telehealth visits that occur 
for sampled providers during sampled weeks? (4) Could additional modules be planned 
and anticipated – now – that would occur periodically during the coming decade or two 
to address some of the shortcomings of the current NAMCS? (5) Can visit form be 
modified so as to better capture team -based care? (6) Recommendations from our group 
may be channeled laterally to other federal surveys (MCBS, NCHS, MEPS) (7) Link 
NAMCS visits to longitudinal patient -level information derived from claims or EMR or 
both for all or at least a subset of NAMCS partic ipants 
03:31:25 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: This is the area where I have a conflict in that I run a national 
primary care registry, but there are multiple Qualified Clinical Data Registries that are 
typically specialty -specific that pull, clean, and structure data from EHRs for more than 
100 million people. They can be an effective bridge to structured EHR data and have 
additional information about practice size, location, patient demographics, payer mix that 
would help sampling and data quality. 
03:31:33 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Great point Ellen re: longevity of NAMCS! 
03:35:12 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Bob -this could be a great resource -and is one of 
many sources of real world evidence (RWE) that could potentially be used to e nhance the 
NAMCS -i think the key question is whether the primary sampling approach remains the 
same, or is modified based on these types of registries 
03:41:20 Randall Stafford, MD, PhD, Stanford University: Change the dictionary! 
03:42:24 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Caleb, good point, thanks. the sampling could change. I also 
agree with your notion that cross -validation should be fit for purpose. We may be able to 
identify a handful of NAMCS items that can be checked in other data that give a sense of 
NAMCS representativeness vs. drift 
03:47:10 Lynn Olson: EHR data has many promises, but overall has proved often challenging to 
turn into research data.  What specific lessons were learned with the use of EHR data for 
the NAMCS in the 2016 -17? 
03:50:29 Ellen Kur tzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: urgent care, 
retail clinics, specialty clinics (e.g., dialysis), telehealth, mobile care, freestanding EDs, 
and work -based clinics 
18 
 
   
   
  
   
    
   
      
 
   
  
 
   
    
  
 
    
    
 
   
  
   
    
 
    
  
  
 
 
 
  
 
   
 
  
 
       
 
   
   03:50:32 John Lumpkin BCBSNC Foundation: telemedicine 
03:51:25 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: And of course 
(my earlier pitch) health centers (FQHCs, CHCs, Indian Health) 
03:51:35 Brian Ward -NCHS: CHCs or FQHCs have also been mentioned in the comments 
03:51:41 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopk ins: Homes!!! 
03:51:56 Ann O'Malley, Mathematica: regular old primary care and specialty care offices 
03:51:59 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Might relabel “Freestanding emergency departments” 
to “Urgicare Centers” or something like that 
03:52:07 Christi ne Pintz -George Washington University: Health Departments 
03:52:29 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: nurse managed 
health centers 
03:52:53 Rajender Aparasu -University of Houston: University Clinics 
03:53:02 Christine Pint z -George Washington University: Managed Care Centers 
03:53:03 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: student health 
centers? 
03:53:15 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: I thought the mention at one point of synchronous vs. 
asynch ronous might be helpful to revisit or note -it is not a site, but rather, an important 
feature regarding mode 
03:53:20 Rajender Aparasu -University of Houston: yes 
03:53:22 Kennon Copeland: NORC at the University of Chicago: Pharmacy 
03:54:13 Christine P intz -George Washington University: Telephone based Tele -health (for 
patients who don't have the ability to use computer or phone -based -seniors, those with 
no internet) 
03:55:12 Ryan White -Rutgers University: community -based clinics (i.e. free clinics located in 
community centers, places of worship, schools) 
03:56:13 Randall Stafford, MD, PhD, Stanford University: app -provided care (real person 
messaging and AI driven care) 
03:56:51 Randall Stafford, MD, PhD, Stanford University: home -based monitoring (BP, INR, 
ECG) 
04:01:42 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: Chiropractic 
care??? 
04:02:17 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: behavioral 
health? 
04:03:40 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & G W School of Nursing: breast feeding 
centers?? 
05:28:43 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: What was the precise change in MEPS that the RWJF 
funding enabled? 
05:36:27 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Joel, you mentioned, analogous to MEPS building 
upon NCHS, “maybe NAMCS could link to other data” [to increase efficiency or value] -
19 
 
  
  
     
  
 
     
   
   
  
    
  
  
    
 
 
     
   
     
  
  
   
 
    
  
 
 
 
  
  
    
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
   
 
   
  
 
     can you please elaborate a bit on what specific data resources you are thinking of, and 
how such linkage might take place? 
05:39:07 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Sharon -thank you for your comments. You suggested 
possibly moving to more locally informative data -do you have thoughts as to how this 
might be done? 
05:52:59 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: We should discuss bartering to increase participation 
06:02:55 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Joel, AHRQ has been brilliant about capturing more and 
better data for MEPS than its charge would otherwise produce. Very clever about helping 
make it so useful. 
06:05:31 Alek Sripipatana (HRSA): Great idea Bob. Thanks! 
06:07:15 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Alek HRSA's data (or CHARN/PCORNet) could also help on 
the front end with sampling frame so that NAMCS is more nationally representative. 
06:09:48 Alek Sri pipatana (HRSA): Great point Bob. I think partnering with the HCCNs is also 
another opportunity to engage a broad spectrum of health centers that are nationally 
representative of health centers 
06:09:52 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Telehealth and care by non -physician providers seem 
to be two of the largest and most manageable pivots for a retooled NAMCS to make 
06:10:46 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Can someone define what “trust networks” are? 
06:15:10 Talisha Searcy, ONC: Trusted Exchange Framewor k and Common Agreement (TEFCA), 
outlines a common set of principles, terms, and conditions to support the development of 
a Common Agreement that would help enable nationwide exchange of electronic health 
information (EHI) across disparate health informatio n networks (HINs). 
06:16:37 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: I appreciate Talisha's point and the interoperability goals of 
ONC, but that is anticipated to be 3 -4 years out at best. The American College of 
Emergency Medicine CEDR registry routinely draws EHR data f rom more than 1000 
emergency rooms, ~28 million visits annually. They have a standardized data model that 
could feed to NAMCS, produce analyses to guide sample selection, be a supplementary 
source, offer a check on representativeness.  That capacity is ava ilable now. 
06:16:46 Talisha Searcy, ONC: Currently, about 57% of hospitals share information on a HiN. 
06:19:20 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: but ERs are often separate from hospital EHR systems. and I 
don't think CEDR feeds HINs. Other outpatient QCDRs an be a source now of outpatient 
standardized data, in fact that is why CMS created them. 
06:32:22 Ann O'Malley, Mathematica: seems like the survey results that we did at 1:20PM 
answers the first question 
06:33:30 Lucie Dalzell --Census Bureau: Just to note from something said earlier --NHAMCS 
stopped collecting outpatient departments and ambulatory surgical locations in 2018; it 
now only includes emergency departments 
06:35:38 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: Lucy where do hospital outpatient department and amb surg 
cente r data get captured? NAMCS? 
06:37:25 Lucie Dalzell --Census Bureau: They are not included in NAMCS.  OPDs are included 
in the Hospital Care Survey that NCHS conducts (Census is not involved with that).  Not 
sure about amb surgery 
06:37:36 Lucie Dalzell --Census Bureau: and thanks : ) 
20 
 
  
 
   
    
     
 
    
    
   
  
   
 
 
     
     
  
 
   
 
    
   
  
 
   
 
  
 
   
  
  
  
   
   
   
  
    
 
    06:43:28 Ann O'Malley, Mathematica: Seems to me that some of the "softer data" is already 
available from NHIS, CAHPS and BRFSS 
06:44:55 Brian Ward -NCHS: There is a CE course related to NAMCS that participants (and 
anyone intere sted) can take to get an hour credit towards their certification. 
06:44:58 Lucie Dalzell --Census Bureau: Grace --thanks for the great suggestions!  We do have 
certificates of appreciation and they are popular! 
06:45:12 Lucie Dalzell --Census Bureau: yes and the CE course is extremely popular! 
06:50:37 Carol DeFrances -NCHS: NCHS has developed an HL7 CDA Implementation Guide for 
the National Health Care Surveys which includes NAMCS.  Epic, Cerner, Allscripts and 
a number of other EHR vendors have developed in terfaces in their system to extract 
NAMCS data.  We also working on a FHIR IG. 
06:54:52 Eric Miller, NIH: There may be some work the cancer registries (SEER specifically) are 
doing with abstracting data from EHRs, pharmacy records, and natural language 
processing from path reports that could be useful/informative for NAMCS 
06:55:12 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Thanks Eric -that looks like a great lead 
07:07:31 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Here is a great example of work by Randy Stafford 
and a coll eague examining off -label use through a direct linkage of drugs and diagnoses: 
https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16682577 / 
07:09:23 Caleb Alexander -Johns Hopkins: Strengths: Comprehensive and clear documentation, 
ability to look year over year 
07:09:55 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: 
•Number of years and regularity of NAMCS data collection 
• Inclusion of patient and provider variables 
• Comprehensiveness of the data/variables collected per visit 
07:11:36 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: Did the ability 
to produce state -level estimates get on the short list? 
07:13:30 Ryan White -Rutgers University: To echo Ellen's question, state -level estimates are 
important for policy and workf orce analyses. 
07:27:38 John Lumpkin BCBSNC Foundation: account for changes in office based care 
07:27:50 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: Would hope 
the redesigned NAMCS could address issues related to the cost, quality, po pulation 
health, utilization of ambulatory care and its workforce 
07:28:32 John Lumpkin BCBSNC Foundation: more operational efficiency -understand reasons for 
visits -understand characteristics of team base care -s 
07:28:53 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: Wondering 
about social determinants of health ? 
07:34:04 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: You could use neighborhood social determinants, like ADI, 
SDI or Massachusett's NSS (being used to adjust Medicaid Payments) --all are shown to 
be associated with poorer outcomes when high. They could be assigned to the practice 
service area 
07:34:34 Bob Phillips, ABFM CPV: as an estimate of practice patient panel risk 
21 
 
    
    
   
   
   
   
   
    
   
   
   
  
  
    
  
 
    07:35:55 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: Do we care 
about the capacity and/or composition of the practices/settings surveyed --for example, # 
or type of administrative staff or range of services? 
07:40:31 Eric Miller, NIH: A little late but just to add to Randy's comments on measuring effective 
care and chronic disease management. It's very difficult to know the "why" someone isn't 
receiving effective care. It seems like this could at least be an opportunity to find what 
care/treatment is recommended or offered from the practice side and the compli ance of it 
from the patient side. There aren't many datasets that have that opportunity 
07:42:28 Ann O'Malley, Mathematica: Thank you! 
07:42:34 Christine Pintz -George Washington University: Thank you! 
07:42:40 Ellen Kurtzman, former NCHS/AH HP Fellow & GW School of Nursing: Thank you 
very much for the opportunity to participate.  Health and safety to everyone! 
07:42:52 Sayeedha Uddin --NCHS: Thank you everyone for your participation and engagement!! 
07:42:54 Ryan White -Rutgers University: Thank you all very much 
07:43:30 Kathy Hempstead: Thank you for including me. It was a very interesting conversation 
and I look forward to seeing the report. 
07:45:32 Brian Ward -NCHS: Thank you everyone -have a good evening! 
22 
