symmetrySS
Review
Security and Privacy in Cloud-Based E-Health System
Remya Sivan * and Zuriati Ahmad Zukarnain *
/gid00030/gid00035/gid00032/gid00030/gid00038/gid00001/gid00033/gid00042/gid00045 /gid00001
/gid00048/gid00043/gid00031/gid00028/gid00047/gid00032/gid00046
Citation: Sivan, R.; Zukarnain, Z.A.
Security and Privacy in Cloud-Based
E-Health System. Symmetry 2021 ,13,
742. https://doi.org/10.3390/
sym13050742
Academic Editor: Debiao He and
Sergei D. Odintsov
Received: 29 January 2021
Accepted: 7 March 2021
Published: 23 April 2021
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral
with regard to jurisdictional claims in
published maps and institutional afﬁl-
iations.
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).Department of Information Security, Faculty of Computer Science and Information Technology, University Putra
Malaysia, Seri Kembangan 43400, Malaysia
*Correspondence: gs59108@student.upm.edu.my (R.S.); zuriati@upm.edu.my (Z.A.Z.)
Abstract: Cloud based healthcare computing have changed the face of healthcare in many ways.
The main advantages of cloud computing in healthcare are scalability of the required service and
the provision to upscale or downsize the data storge, collaborating Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) and
machine learning. The current paper examined various research studies to explore the utilization
of intelligent techniques in health systems and mainly focused into the security and privacy issues
in the current technologies. Despite the various beneﬁts related to cloud-computing applications
for healthcare, there are different types of management, technology handling, security measures,
and legal issues to be considered and addressed. The key focus of this paper is to address the
increased demand for cloud computing and its deﬁnition, technologies widely used in healthcare,
their problems and possibilities, and the way protection mechanisms are organized and prepared
when the company chooses to implement the latest evolving service model. In this paper, we focused
on a thorough review of current and existing literature on different approaches and mechanisms used
in e-Health to deal with security and privacy issues. Some of these approaches have strengths and
weaknesses. After selecting original articles, the literature review was carried out, and we identiﬁed
several models adopted in their solutions. We arrived at the reviewed articles after comparing the
models used.
Keywords: e-Health; cloud computing; security; privacy in health system
1. Introduction
Innovative changes have permitted progressive answers for be actualized to upgrade
the nature of human existence. Analysts considering the development of innovation have
identiﬁed and assessed wellbeing data from these sources to acquire information and take
care of wellbeing-related issues. In this manner, the advancement of incorporated medical
care innovation has the likelihood to enhance efﬁciency and improve understanding of the
results at each level of the medical care framework. Long-term care (LTC) facilities are a
crucial a part of the health care industry, providing care to the fastest-growing group of the
population. However, the adoption of electronic health records (EHRs) in LTC facilities
lags behind other areas of the health care industry [ 1]. The advancement of new Electronic-
Health (e-Health) application frameworks can take care of speciﬁc issues pertinent to
conventional medical care frameworks by means of powerful patient wellbeing controls,
pervasive information access, distant patient checking, quick clinical intercession, and
decentralized electronic-medical care records. These frameworks can oversee wellbeing
data and patient information, upgrade personal satisfaction, increase coordinated effort,
improve results, decrease expenses, and increase the generally efﬁciency of e-medical
care administrations [ 2]. For health care, EHRs are required to be shared among different
healthcare organizations, medical drug manufacturers, pharmacists, medical insurance
providers, researchers, and patients. This poses a signiﬁcant challenge keep the patients’
sensitive data secure [ 3]. In addition, Eisenach depicted e-Health as a tech industry that
addresses the assembly of the Internet, systems administration, and medical services and
incredibly beneﬁts the framework clients and partners. E-wellbeing is a rising ﬁeld at
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742. https://doi.org/10.3390/sym13050742 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/symmetry
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 2 of 14
the convergence of clinical informatics, general wellbeing, and Internet wellbeing admin-
istrations that embrace and drive the overall advancement of new innovation to tackle
profound issues, drive down expenses, and improve understanding [4] (Malluhi, 2020).
Along these lines, models, gadgets, and frameworks associated with the Internet of
Things (IoT) have become universal. Besides, the broad appropriation of IoT has harmo-
nized with the improvement of interrelated correspondence advances, for example, regis-
tering knowledge for medical care, business, industry, operational frameworks, etc. The
efﬁcient and safe usage of wellbeing data advancements, beneﬁts, and all-encompassing
e-Health frameworks requires exceedingly efﬁcient and strong security frameworks to
make such execution reasonable. The universality of IoT frameworks has driven the
innovative work of IoT innovation, remembering assorted designs for use for wellbeing or-
ganizations. Connecting networks, gadgets, applications, and administrations with the IoT
permits e-Health frameworks to share related data utilizing the most recent innovation [ 5]
( Hassen 2020).
IoT and distributed computing are progressive innovations that supplement each
other’s capacities when incorporated as ﬂexible, versatile, and efﬁcient tolerant medical
service frameworks. The blend provides beneﬁts, including simplicity of execution con-
trasted with regular organizations, improved data security during correspondence, speedy
admittance to records, and energy investment funds over customary modalities. IoT-cloud-
based e-Health frameworks can signiﬁcantly improve medical care beneﬁts and advance
persistent efﬁcient development. In IoT-cloud-based e-Health frameworks, hidden IoT
networks empower correspondence between clients, administrations, and workers, with
clinical information stored in the cloud. With new improvements in distributed computing
proceeding to push past business as usual, different security dangers to be discussed or
when storing data should be considered [6].
Distributed computing is an innovation that changed the medical care industry. Dis-
tributed computing’s signiﬁcant advantages are innovation adaptability, savvy, energy
investment funds, processing and sharable assets, and quicker sending. This paper will
walk through distributed computing identiﬁed within the medical service industry and
other diverse cloud-related security and signiﬁcant protection challenges. Additionally,
we will discuss the plausible security arrangements. Coordinated effort of information
in the cloud brings serious security and protection worries for medical service suppliers.
Therefore, endeavored security, effectiveness, security, and versatility are primary worries
in the reception of cloud-related innovation administrations [7].
Mists are piles of virtualized assets of actual workers, organized, virtualized workers,
applications or potential beneﬁts. Figuring assets can be arranged in clusters or individually
to provide the need of the end client of the shopper. The up-time is itemized among
arrangements, for example, Service-Level Agreement, SLA (Sandy 2011)
Distributed computing is an innovation that is intended to give and oversee appli-
cation and information, Server accessibility, and end client ﬁguring (EUC) conveyance.
Cloud computing permits staff or workers to obtain and deal with their application and
information continuously on any gadget, from any area. [ 8] A fruitful distributed comput-
ing arrangement should give rearranged or brought together, logical, and secure insight
for infrastructure and end clients. Since all advances have a particular issue, distributed
computing likewise has its own highlights, for example, the board, innovation, security,
and legitimate issues. [ 9] The fundamental motivation behind this paper is to challenge
the idea of cloud-based ﬁguring, the current utilization of medical care and the difﬁculties,
openings, and ways to deal with arranging where medical care has settled on another
cloud-based help model (Steve 2019).
2. Methods and Materials
All the open writing that is identiﬁed with e-Health security and safety is essentially
hard to survey. Therefore, in terms of reviewing selected posts, we dominate. Following
the collection of more than one hundred and ten (1 1 0) speciﬁc posts, the writing audit was
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 3 of 14
completed, and a few templates that followed their responses were sorted. We downloaded
more than forty (40) papers from the ACM advanced library, 57 articles from the IEEE
computerized library, and 43 from the IEE Explore advanced library to provide a fair
and calculable number of articles surveyed. Different articles were accessed from the
specialized repositories of Springer, Elsevier, and Science Direct. There were hardly any
papers downloaded from numerous diaries that are not known and respected as those
cited. We obtained 110 surveyed publications in the face of conﬂicting models and methods
used by many analysts. Due to the similarities found in the models obtained by some
scientists, the analyzed papers were restricted to the momentum number.
Besides that, by looking at and dissecting the strengths of each of the approaches
obtained in seeking a solution to the protection problem in e-Health, we directly analyzed
the papers. In addition, we identiﬁed numerous shortcomings of both of these techniques
that eventually indicated the way forward to mitigate e-Health security and safety slips. E-
wellbeing is a developing area at the crossroads of clinical informatics, general well-being,
and industry, relating to well-being administrations and knowledge communicated or
enhanced through the Internet and related technologies. [ 10–13] The word represents a spe-
cialized turn of events from a more detailed viewpoint, but also a perspective, a demeanor,
and a duty for coordinated, national speculation to enhance patient care through the use of
information and communication technologies locally, territorially, and internationally [ 14].
2.1. Research Strategy
As this a comprehensive review, we aim to update the ﬁndings of previous studies (54)
regarding the same matter. We retrieved eligible studies from late 2013 to December 2020.
The study selection searched for publications from Symmetry Journals in MDPI, other
Journals in MDPI, IEEE Access journal, and other IEEE Journals. The ﬁrst step involved
including the relevant articles with related keywords in the title or abstract based on the
inclusion criteria. Papers not related to our study were excluded. The second step consisted
of a full-text screening of the relevant studies to select the most eligible articles.
2.2. Research Questions
In this paper, we will be discussing the three main areas in ehealth system, such as:
1. What is the cloud computing scheme and state-of-the-art of the cloud-based comput-
ing solutions commonly used in healthcare systems?
2. What are the security concerns or challenges in Cloud-based computing in Healthcare
systems?
3. How are the current Cloud computing-based ehealth systems being protected?
4. What is the best solution for security in cloud-based E-health systems?
3. State-of-the-Art Cloud Computing-Based E-Health Systems
Cloud computing schemas are mainly divided into three (3) types: Infrastructure as a
Service (IaaS): Infrastructure as a Service is a cloud-computing technology that delivers
computing resources, networking, and storage to consumers on-demand, over the internet.
It enables end customer or end users to upscale or downsize resources on an as-when
needed basis, reducing the need for upscaling, up-front capital expenditures or unnecessary
infrastructure. [15,16]
Platform as a Service (PaaS): Platform as a Service (PaaS) is termed as a development
and deployment environment provided by a cloud partner. PaaS provides a platform on
which software is developed and deployed. IaaS platforms handle the complexity around
operating systems and servers and leaves application developers liberally to focus the
business requirements of the software.
Software as a Service (SaaS): Software as a service (SaaS) is the option for businesses
in the cloud market. It is easily accessible—all you need is an internet connection and a
browser—and it is hands-off. The SaaS delivery model requires vendors to manage all the
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 4 of 14
technical issues—meaning customers do not need to lean on their in-house IT expertise.
Figure 1 shows the High-Level Architecture of the Cloud Infra-structure.
Figure 1. Cloud Infrastructure Architecture.
The E-health system is a newly developed space that contains electronic processes
and communications. EHR or EMR is a compilation of patient health data. EHR or EMR is
digital information that contains data, diagrams, patient medical information, medications,
hospital or clinic reports, radiology photographs, billing information, and other sensitive
patient information. Cloud computing offers the cost of effectively storing, processing, and
updating data with efﬁciency and quality [17].
Cloud computing offers the advantage of access to hosted services from multiple
lo-cations with a number of multiple users. E-health systems promise faster, robust, and
sought-after access to medical records, fewer medical regulations, and improved health
care quality, but equally reﬂect patient privacy, improper authorization, and misuse of
EHR data. Cloud security and privacy are critical requirements when sharing or accessing
patient data. An overview of e-health structures is shown in Figure 2.
Figure 2. E-health architecture in the cloud.
There are many ways to achieve the use of the cloud platform. A few of them are as
mentioned below.
Public Cloud: A cloud service provider will make resources available to private and
public users via the Internet for free on-going or demand purposes that allow clients to
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 5 of 14
pay only for what they use without lower fees. Instead of purchasing a physical server and
switching, the company can purchase a virtual server and network. A virtual server can
be turned on or off for minutes and can be accessed anywhere. The public cloud relies on
a customized environment to provide corporate infra-structure expansion, allowing the
company to host certain aspects of its infra structure and services on virtual and identiﬁable
third-party servers. Public cloud service providers have unique capabilities, and they offer
excellent types of services and price models. Companies considering migration have
carefully considered their options when it comes to choosing a provider, especially if they
are to be terminated in a long-term contract. Careful planning can help reduce costs in
monthly payments for cloud services, but organizations with unexpected age of the us-age
community may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to avoid spending large sums on public cloud services
under unforeseen use. [18]
Independent cloud: A public cloud is an infrastructure that uses a single organization
and deﬁnes a single network or datacenter that provides services hosted to a speciﬁc group
of people. The public cloud service offers easy access. Although a private cloud is less
expensive than using a public cloud, it is not easily measured. The development or growth
of infrastructure will require the purchase of additional equipment. Similarly, when the
need for a private cloud decreases, expensive resources and equipment are misused [ 19,20].
Hybrid Cloud: A cloud infrastructure that is a combination of two or more clouds
that can be a combination of a private, or public cloud. In hybrid cloud infrastructure, the
organization provides and manages resources within the private data center and provides
outsourced services such as VMware that works with Fortinet Networks to provide hybrid
cloud infrastructure to businesses to lighten their private cloud to remote servers while the
public cloud is secure.
The Hybrid model cloud is usually an excellent deal for those looking at a public
cloud vs. private cloud. Hybrid Cloud refers to any integration of personal and public
cloud solutions. The hybrid cloud environment allows organizations to take advantage of
both types of cloud platforms and choose which cloud will provide the speciﬁc data needs.
For example, the hybrid cloud provides another way to store sensitive data company
information that can provide services through the public cloud while maintaining sensitive
conﬁguration in the private cloud [21,22].
Advantages of Cloud-Based Ehealth Systems
The more a healthcare center connects system information to a global computer
network such as the Internet, the more it opens up access from around the world and
facilitates data leaks. The need for an electronic health record should be protected from
illegal users who may misuse this for a variety of purposes. Identity-based encryption is
one of the best security solutions to protect eHealth record data [ 23,24]. The algorithm deals
with problems found in common cryptographic techniques using any thread as a public key.
The system can enhance the security of health records by adding authentication procedures
to three connected servers. In this system, communication between three servers uses
encrypted data using IBE, so that each server can perform the encryption and decryption
process during the data exchange. Only servers with IDs can access and extract health
record data. Currently, test results show performance relative to the speed of the algorithm
used in the system [25,26].
As discussed, and referred to in article [ 27], Cloud Storage is a computer model that
stores data on the Internet or in the cloud. Cloud storage is delivered according to demand
and capacity and costs that will leave the customer investing and managing their data
storage infrastructure. This provides speed, scale, and durability.
Below are some of the general advantages of cloud computing; in our case, we focus
on E-health systems.
Ease of access using a ‘Web Browser’ with integrated Single-Sign-On (SSO).
No requirement for VPN to access Cross Sites or Networks.
Simpliﬁed Management and On-demand Scalability.
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 6 of 14
No Overhead Cost to maintain the physical infrastructure.
No Hardware post warranty charges for the physical infrastructure.
No Power Consumption.
One of the major schemes in healthcare systems is attribute-based encryption for data.
Encryption provides high-class access control for every user and revocation, scalability,
dynamic user management, and traceability. Users have high-grade login access which
can be integrated with 2FA authentication as well as OTP for every access. Similarly, users’
access can be revoked from a centralized management console at any point in time by the
administrator. The most important advantage is that every access is recorded and can be
traced, and clipping implemented for each session [ 28]. Privileged Access Management
(PAM) is one of the best technologies which can be used if there are many subsystems that
a user needs to access at a single point in time.
Another scheme used in health care in cloud computing is robust and secure access
control which resolves single-point performance bottle-neck problems. This solves the
majority of the security access control issues as the certiﬁcate needs to be trusted and issued
from a certiﬁed hosting platform. As we all know, the main disadvantage is that there is no
process or mechanism for attribute revocation.
4. Cloud-Based E-Health Security Issues
As we all know, cloud computing has its own security challenges which emerge
from time to time due to proper security technologies and because of a lack of security
compliance, as discussed using the benchmark in research papers [29–33].
A few of them are mentioned below such as:
Conﬁdentiality: Conﬁdentiality is a process or mechanism of safeguarding patient
health data from unauthorized access from public or internal users. Unauthorized access is
dangerous and can potentially result in data leakage and can even cause serious damage to
businesses. With respect to the data size, the number of patients on devices increases, and
there is a huge potential threat to the data to expose these to external parties. Conﬁdentiality
is important in the healthcare industry as the patient can be reluctant to give personal
details to doctors if they are not conﬁdent with the conﬁdentiality. By implementing access
control and using encryption techniques, conﬁdentiality can be achieved.
Integrity: Integrity is important factor to make sure that the data are not changed at
any single point in time. The HIPAA Security illustrates that covered entities must imple-
ment procedures and policies to protect electronic healthcare information from improper
destruction or alteration.
Integrity can be achieved by a hashing mechanism or checksum for all the data. One
of the best and accurate ways is by implementing block chain technology as it is merely
impossible to change the hash of the data as it will change the entire chain if any of the
hashes are changed.
Availability: The information must be available all the time. Business critical systems
should be clustered or must have high availability to have maximum uptime without
service interruptions.
Data Violations: Business Impact on Company Dignity and Trust for Customers
or Partners. Degradation of intellectual property by competitors can lead to product
outsourcing, ﬁnancial discovery, and the occurrence of events and forensics.
Wrong ﬁx: This is one of the most common cloud challenges.
As cloud computing is a shared resource, any misconﬁguration of the datacenter will
lead to complete exploration of all the customer data hosted within the same datacenter.
Lack of Security Technologies: The biggest challenge during the transition to cloud
computing is the implementation of appropriate security architecture to withstand cyber-
attacks. Unfortunately, this process remains a mystery for several organizations. Data
are exposed to different threats when organizations assume that cloud migration is a
“lift-and-shift” endeavor of simply porting their existing IT stack and security controls to
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 7 of 14
a cloud environment. A lack of knowledge of the shared security responsibility is also a
contributing factor.
Account hijacking: A key feature where attackers gain access to accounts, and serious
or sensitive rights are exploited. Criminal attacks on sensitive data, cloud system exploits,
or access to stolen signals can put these accounts at risk.
Insider Threat: Circumstances have been identiﬁed including malicious servers, em-
ployees saving sensitive data on their unprotected devices and programs, employees or
other insiders who steal stolen emails exposed by malicious attacks on company assets.
Unsecured APIs: Cloud computing providers develop a range of user software and
APIs to allow customers to manage and interact with cloud services. The security and
availability of standard cloud services are linked to the security of those APIs. Poorly
designed APIs can lead to misuse or even worse, infringement of information. Exposed,
broken, and hacked APIs have serious concerns about data breaches.
Healthcare really needs to understand the safety requirements for designing and
introducing visible connectors online.
5. Classiﬁcation of Security Solutions in E-Health Systems
5.1. Cryptographic Security
The continued advancement of information technology and data communications
strengthens the exchange of highly sensitive medical information. electronic health systems
are widely used, and many medical facilities rely on the transmission and receipt of
medical information online and on local networks. Over the years, many security systems
have been introduced to monitor patient privacy and ensure the safety of interchangeable
medical data. Cryptography is one of the techniques that often provides security for
eHealth systems.
The Cryptographic method allows us to various computations to take place directly
from encrypted data, without the need to deﬁne them. As such, encryption schemes with
homo-morphic structures can be useful in building conﬁdentiality agreements, where
conﬁdential information remains protected not only during exchange and storage, but
also processing.
Cryptography is a method of compiling, validating data, and exchanging them using
conferences with the goal of keeping track of those data set up for them to investigate.
Countless methods have been suggested to protect patient health care data. However,
Cryptographic methods can be seen in two forms, symmetric-key cryptography, and
Asymmetric-key cryptography, where the former uses the same encryption and coding key
while the latter uses different keys
It relies heavily on methods such as PKE, SKE, and a few native cryptographic devices
used to protect the e-Health cloud. In PKE, two different key conﬁgurations are used, an
open key and a pair of encryption and spelling keys although SKE-based methods use an
equally shared private key as clearly deﬁned in the PKE & SKE cryptography methods in
other articles [34].
5.1.1. PKE & SKE (Public Key Encryption and Symmetric Key Encryption)
In PKE schemes, two different key sets are considered: public key and secret key. Pairs
of private and public data encryption and encryption keys, Sache-based apache approaches
use the same shared private key. Other cryptographic schemes include several encryption
schemes such as Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE), Searchable Encryption (SE), proxy
encryption, homomorphic encryption, and Identity-Based Encryption (IBE).
As already noted [ 35], cryptography has a profound effect on the security of e-health
systems. However, there are some non-cryptographic methods that can also provide
security, but these are not widely used as they provide partial security for the e-health
cloud under the security provided by crypto methods. Therefore, these systems are used
with crypto methods in the hybrid system, some of which are shown below.
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 8 of 14
Encryption is key to data security. Encryption shuts down electronic information so
that no one other than the key can access the information. It does not matter if the organizer
breaks the organization’s security control of the information; it will be a small thing. Data
encryption is the process of encrypting data in one place, then transferring data over the
network, and then deciphering data in the cloud. It is an important process nowadays
because unauthorized people (hackers) have access to information, which creates a data
problem. That data can be stolen during transfer.
A range of encryption methods is used in the E-health system such as Broad-cast
Encryption Schemes, Attribute-based Encryption, blockchain based encryption, and Search-
able Symmetric Encryption.
5.1.2. Broadcast Encryption Programs
Stream encryption allows a mid-stream broadcast website to secure shipments to
associate a complete set of recipients while minimizing the high-speed communications
mentioned in the article [36].
5.1.3. Qualiﬁed Encryption
Privacy-based encryption can also be a form of public key cryptography in which the
user’s private key and the security area-based security unit deletion of text deﬁnitions is
only possible if the set of user key symbols matches the text symbols discussed explicitly
in the articles [37,38]
5.1.4. Blockchain-Based Encryption
In the E-health system, the veriﬁcation, preservation, and synchronization of electronic
medical records have always been a serious problem, and the random distribution of patient
records will present various risks to the patient’s privacy. Hash counts in electronic medical
data and keeping the corresponding value in the blockchain ensure its consistency and
integrity. Details listed in clinical records were removed from the Ethereum blockchain,
and a good agreement was submitted to the Ethereum block-fasten to accept the viewing
of word searches instead of the third-party person mentioned in the article [39]
5.1.5. Searchable Symmetric Encryption
Searchable Symmetric Access (SSE) when transferring to the cloud allows a person
to query the data entered without the risk of data loss. Although interest is widespread,
current research does not examine how buildings under SSE are constructed and how they
end up in various areas of the SSE system. Most applications use a ﬁle table, where the
appropriate ﬁle size and sublinear search can be done using the inverted ﬁle list. Direct
referrals can only be obtained using the direct reference shown in the articles [40,41].
5.2. Access Control Manager (AAM)
One of the ways to authenticate and access control managers where users use tokens
to access their sensitive records stored in the cloud where the server identiﬁes users and
determines their access rights is via the AAM server found in articles [42,43].
Full Private Blockchain (FPB) and Consortium Blockchain (CB)
An integrated blockchain model of a fully independent blockchain (FPB) and consor-
tium blockchain (CB) was proposed to improve the time taken for data validation. Here,
FPB is used as an old database of health care facilities and CB is used to store medical data
from all participating medical professionals discussed and referred to in article [ 44] authors
are offered multiple options on the E-health cloud-computing platform.
While the conﬁdentiality of data converted to the cloud between institutions is not
processed, medical data are sensitive. Electronic Health Applications include a shared
distribution of digital information between providers and patients.
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 9 of 14
Security Transfer is an end-to-end process that must be managed regularly. As hackers
continue to seek new vulnerability to take advantage of it, any cloud-driven app should be
updated frequently to stay ahead of threats. It should be a complete balance protection for
user access. A mobile app, EMR, or e-health is about secure access. User access should be
controlled with a simple yet effective authentication.
Security can be budget-friendly, which is why EMRs and e-health programs were
initially unaffordable at minimal follow-up. Today, applications that were only available
to those with the same budget as hospitals have been made available by a very small
ambulance site.
The non-cryptographic approach is mainly associated with policy-based approvals in
the basis of labeling infrastructure such as access control methods such as RBAC, ABAC,
Mandatory Access Control (MAC), IBAC, etc.
Table 1 describes multiple solutions for data security in ehealth systems.
Table 1. Custom-based solutions for security in E-Health Systems.
Reference Security & Privacy E-Health Cloud Contribution
[9] 2016p p p Proposed secure personal e-Healthcare system based on
certiﬁcate CA to authorized users only.
[10] 2016p p p Proposed a prototype-based Personalised Health monitoring
application
[11] 2020p pxProposed a wearable IoT-enabled heart disease prediction
system using the MDCNN classiﬁer.
[12] 2020p pxThis work addressed the development of IoT-based eHealth
systems on both the hardware and software levels
[17] 2019p p pEfﬁcient comprehensive security mechanisms for EHR also
explored the techniques to maintain the integrity and
conﬁdentiality of patients’ information.
[19] 2019p pxProposed a novel collaborative eHealth system, which
supports multilevel privacy-preserving data sharing
(MPPDS).
[45] 2018p p p Proposed a Benchmark lossless method which is suitable for
remoting health monitoring systems.
[46] 2018p p pProposed the ﬁrst secure and efﬁcient encrypted EMR
deduplication scheme for cloud-assisted eHealth systems,
namely HealthDep.
[47] 2017p p pReviewed the applications developed in the health industry
which are focused on patient care from home and
implemented a service-oriented (SOA) design in
architecture.
[48] 2014p p pProvided an answer for privacy-preserving knowledge
storage by group action of PRF-based key management for
unlikability, a research and access pattern concealment
theme supported redundancy, and a secure assortment
technique for privacy conserving keyword search.
[49] 2017p p p Automatic IoHT building blocks to exchange the information
between devices and integrated cloud computing.
6. Proposed Solutions for Security in Cloud-Based Ehealth Systems
The conventional approach to healthcare practices in the world has been changed by
the growth of information and communication technologies. In the partial abandonment of
paper-based medical prescription to the electronic version, this development is well noticed,
particularly in most developed countries of the world. The need to federate and integrate
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 10 of 14
electronic health information from different ﬁelds, such as laboratories for medical research,
hospitals, and health insurance companies, has led to the development of a concept called
electronic health (e-Health) [ 50]. Simply put, e-Health can simply be deﬁned as the use of
the infrastructure of information technology (IT) and e-commerce practices for health infor-
mation processing, sharing, and manipulation. However, it is noted that the application has
made it very difﬁcult to manage the need for a cloud-based environment that enables the
collaborative sharing of information across multiple administrative domains by different
domains involved in the sharing of medical data [ 51]. Cloud computing has so many
beneﬁts, including the timely transfer and sharing of medical information seamlessly. It
has also relieved the rigor involved in managing the infrastructure for healthcare providers
and has provided them with ample opportunity to familiarize themselves with IT service
providers. Cloud computing has been established in various academic papers to offer
numerous advantages including scalability, cost-effectiveness, agility enhancement, and
collaborative resource sharing [52].
There are security and privacy challenges, despite the various advantages, that ur-
gently deserve the utmost attention for the realization of its efﬁcient and full-scale use [ 53].
On several occasions, cryptographic and non-cryptographic approaches have been used to
ensure the preservation of cloud-computing security and privacy of health information. In
addition, ﬁne-grained as well as patient-centric access control systems are frequently used
to achieve electronic health privacy. In this paper, different security measures are reviewed
that are used to protect data. Their strengths and weaknesses are exposed as well. Efforts
have been made to provide better options for securing e-health information.
Simplicio et al. (2015) demonstrated how a lightweight framework was used to
introduce a Transport Layer Security/Secure Sockets Layer (TLS/SSL)-based Secure Health
architecture to protect server data exchange that requires no additional security layer.
Secure Health, which includes many security features, such as authorization, provides
transmitted and stored data security services. It has a good advantage in preventing from
accessing the system containing health information without authorization. In addition
to this, it provides the manager with the ability to identify errors from the information
provided. The primary challenge is that it is platform-dependent and not scalable, despite
the advantages of this framework. The security policy and framework must provide room
for scalability and future expansion in a cloud-based environment. To ensure that e-Health
care service providers reduce the cost of maintaining data and allowing them to be securely
accessible online, Barua et. al., proposed a security mechanism with different levels of
hierarchy. Provision of access control was carried out at a central level. In such a way that
privileges were mapped and juxtaposed to different roles with ABE access structures, they
adopted Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE). The main challenge with this approach is the
complexity of responding to various requests from different users due to storage of health
information located in a centralized server. In addition, when there is a concurrent request
by users, priority needs to be set. The distributed and collaborative nature of the e-Health
system was considered by Guo et al. (2012) to solve the challenge of having data storage of
health information in a centralized server. They did not allow a centralized server to handle
authentication and authorization procedures; instead, they allowed both the patients and
doctors to carry out the authorization process. In reality, without disclosing their attributes
and identities, users are given access based on their privileges.
7. Discussion
Specialists have developed a system for IoT-based shrewd well-being systems used
in their proposal as an e-Health platform, zeroing in on interoperability, different criteria
for creativity, correspondence protocols, and framework prerequisites. Web developments,
correspondence conventions, and equipment schedules were used in the relevant conven-
tions and guidelines. Their structure was shown to be safe through trust tests that showed
that it was possible to achieve interoperability between various IoT gadgets, concepts, and
conventions in an e-Health system all the time in the Internet world. In order to upgrade the
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 11 of 14
transmitted delegate layer of information between sensor hubs and the Cloud, specialists
suggested the concept of Fog registering in a medical services IoT environment as a savvy
e-Health framework. They took advantage of the omnipresence of current patient care
systems to reduce the weight of sensors, organizations, and remote populations of medical
facilities, solving challenges of portability, energy consumption, ﬂexibility, and reliability in
this manner. The efﬁcient implementation of their e-Health platform is an entryway known
as UT-Gate that offers more high-level highlights, such as an IoT-based Early Warning Score
(EWS) well-being assessment framework with commonly updated framework awareness,
efﬁciency, execution, interoperability, security, and usability. To facilitate access to patient’s
data by way of the network using distributed computing, specialists planned a platform
integrating IoT gadgets. Doctors were best trained to take care of their patient conditions in
an effective design by facilitating the acquisition and aggregation of the knowledge needed
to screen well-being comprehension. Using distributed computing, gadgets, knowledge
conglomeration, and handling, information stockpiling and information investigation
were designed for a four-venture engineering for e-health frameworks. They portrayed
applications where the system will be useful, essential associated developments to make
it work, and beneﬁts and limitations of chaperons. Specialists suggested the invention
of the IoT-based body sensor network using lightweight remote sensor hubs with IoT to
transmit and receive information via distributed computing. In order to obtain the patient
care system and to ensure that information stays conﬁdential, they recognize privacy and
security conventions. In e-Health frameworks, specialists investigated the production of
the mixture of IoT gadgets and distributed computing and delineated applicable chal-
lenges, opportunities, and limitations. They offered conﬁrmation that the security of the
IoT-cloud-based e-Health platform is urgent and suggested a validation strategy to receive
IoT-cloud-based e-Heath frameworks with standard deployment and accommodation
conventions. Seniors outlined the cloud-facilitating administrative beneﬁts and assumed
that IoT-cloud-based systems improve new industries by increasing accessibility and ex-
pandability and by reducing costs through the temperance of an as-you-use pay structure.
By combining three different security models, they achieved their design: Discretionary
Access Control (DAC), Mandatory Access Control (MAC), and Role-Based Access Control
(RBAC) to come up with a new architecture that allows access privileges to be dictated
and set by health care providers and patients. The main disadvantage of this framework
lies in its ability to be useful only as a standalone safety model in order to achieve the
requirements for health electronic records. Barua et al. proposed a secure patient-centered
electronic health information scheme to provide reliable access privileges in a cloud-based
environment using a protocol called Proxy Encryption. In order to allow patient-centered
access control, the schema with ﬁve main stages uses Attribute Based Encryption. The per-
formance analysis shows that the performance of the schema is excellent. The shortcoming
is that it is not sufﬁciently ﬂexible for other types of distributed systems. Furthermore,
there is no room for scalability and ﬂexibility in the schema. Only a limited number of
users was considered during evaluation.
8. Research Issues and Future Directions
The main concern at this stage is to discuss future indicators related to privacy and se-
curity in Electronic Health Records (EHRs). EHR data are extremely sensitive, conﬁdential,
and in particular, are stored on third-party servers, leading to signiﬁcant risks in terms of
data privacy and security. Some of the major research problems include:
 Procedures and procedures on how to protect and secure the data stored in the cloud.
 The use of conﬁdential health care data.
 What will be the best encryption system that can be used to maintain data security?
The above points highlight various research issues related to the privacy and security
of e-health information. Therefore, we have analyzed and identiﬁed the need to use security
infrastructure in e-health systems that will ensure the privacy and security of data and thus
protect patient privacy and trust.
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 12 of 14
Privacy is one of the most important aspects of the healthcare industry. Maintaining
breach of conﬁdentiality and keeping track of conﬁdentiality through medical records are
essential to detecting and preventing fraud. Keeping track of data sources and programs
is advisable.
This research can be further enhanced by using user authenticity and privacy in Cloud
Big secure data. A secure authentication method that incorporates tree-based hashing in
the authorization structure, used for user authentication during multi-level conﬁguration,
resists fraudulent attacks and protects privacy. The authoritative structure of hierarchical
attributes leads to a lot of confusion and ﬁnal problems. Artiﬁcial Intelligence (AI) or Big
Data Analytics (BDA) incorporates system design controls for each process. More recently,
commands have been compared to replica nodes. Leaked privacy of users and their data
are displayed with random action keys in secure data connections. By using analytics, it is
easier to make a normal life for one or more patients with one view instead of one at a time.
9. Conclusions
Healthcare has already adopted cloud-based solutions to solve multiple problems cost
effectively. While considering the future and growth of cloud-based healthcare services,
we focused on the security of critical electronic health records (EHRs) and proposed an
identity-based secure and encrypted data-sharing technique. We have studied the existing
PKE, IBE, IBBE, & ABE and then proposed multiple solutions to safeguard cloud-based data
in ehealth systems. Appropriate security solutions should be developed and maintained to
protect data security. The future of cloud-based eHealth services will be the integration
of ﬁle-based and cloud-based applications that integrate a computer-based hybrid IT
solution that measures the ﬂexibility and scalability associated with cloud management
and healthcare data security. This review highlights a comprehensive study of existing
cloud-based eHealth solutions that are cryptographic and non-cryptographic methods for
protecting the privacy and security of digital data.
Author Contributions: R.S. and Z.A.Z.; methodology: R.S.; data curation: R.S.; resources: R.S.;
writing—original draft preparation: R.S.; writing—review and editing: R.S. and Z.A.Z.; supervision.
All authors have read and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Informed Consent Statement: Not applicable.
Data Availability Statement: Not applicable.
Acknowledgments: We thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and sugges-
tions, which helped us to improve the content of our paper.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Kruse, C.S.; Mileski, M.; Vijaykumar, A.G.; Viswanathan, S.V .; Suskandla, U.; Chidambaram, Y. Impact of electronic health records
on long-term care facilities: Systematic review. JMIR Med. Inform. IEEE 2017 ,5, e35. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
2. Butpheng, C.; Yeh, K.-H.; Xiong, H. Security and Privacy in IoT-Cloud-Based e-Health Systems—A Comprehensive Review.
Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1191. [CrossRef]
3. Ismail, L.; Materwala, H. Blockchain Paradigm for Healthcare: Performance Evaluation. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1200. [CrossRef]
4. Malluhi, Q.; Tran, V .D.; Trinh, V .C. Decentralized Broadcast Encryption Schemes with Constant Size Ciphertext and Fast
Decryption. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 969. [CrossRef]
5. Hassen, O.A.; Abdulhussein, A.A.; Darwish, S.M.; Othman, Z.A.; Tiun, S.; Lotfy, Y.A. Towards a Secure Signature Scheme Based
on Multimodal Biometric Technology: Application for IOT Blockchain Network. Symmetry 2020 ,12, 1699. [CrossRef]
6. Abdulghani, H.A.; Nijdam, N.A.; Collen, A.; Konstantas, D. A Study on Security and Privacy Guidelines, Countermeasures,
Threats: IoT Data at Rest Perspective. Symmetry 2019 ,11, 774. [CrossRef]
7. Huh, J.-H. Big Data Analysis for Personalized Health Activities: Machine Learning Processing for Automatic Keyword Extraction
Approach. Symmetry 2018 ,10, 93. [CrossRef]
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 13 of 14
8. Kang, J.; Chung, H.; Lee, J.; Park, J.H. The Design and Analysis of a Secure Personal Healthcare System Based on Certiﬁcates.
Symmetry 2016 ,8, 129. [CrossRef]
9. Griebel, L.; Prokosch, H.-U.; Köpcke, F.; Toddenroth, D.; Christoph, J.; Leb, I.; Engel, I.; Sedlmayr, M. A scoping review of cloud
computing in healthcare. BMC Med. Inform. Decis. Making 2015 ,15, 17. [CrossRef]
10. Venˇ ckauskas, A.; Štuikys, V .; Toldinas, J.; Jusas, N. A Model-Driven Framework to Develop Personalized Health Monitoring.
Symmetry 2016 ,8, 65. [CrossRef]
11. Khan, M.A. An IoT Framework for Heart Disease Prediction Based on MDCNN Classifier. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 34717–34727. [CrossRef]
12. Yang, M.; Hara-Azumi, Y. Implementation of Lightweight eHealth Applications on a Low-Power Embedded Processor. IEEE
Access 2020 ,8, 121724–121732. [CrossRef]
13. Guo, L.; Li, Z.; Yau, W.; Tan, S. A Decryptable Attribute-Based Keyword Search Scheme on eHealth Cloud in Internet of Things
Platforms. IEEE Access 2020 ,8, 26107–26118. [CrossRef]
14. Edemacu, K.; Park, H.K.; Jang, B.; Kim, J.W. Privacy Provision in Collaborative Ehealth With Attribute-Based Encryption: Survey,
Challenges and Future Directions. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 89614–89636. [CrossRef]
15. Ma, H.; Xie, Y.; Wang, J.; Tian, G.; Liu, Z. Revocable Attribute-Based Encryption Scheme with Efﬁcient Deduplication for Ehealth
Systems. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 89205–89217. [CrossRef]
16. Caiza, J.C.; Martin, Y.; Guaman, D.S.; del Alamo, J.M.; Yelmo, J.C. Reusable Elements for the Systematic Design of Privacy-Friendly
Information Systems: A Mapping Study. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 66512–66535. [CrossRef]
17. Chenthara, S.; Ahmed, K.; Wang, H.; Whittaker, F. Security and Privacy-Preserving Challenges of e-Health Solutions in Cloud
Computing. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 74361–74382. [CrossRef]
18. Razaque, A.; Amsaad, F.; Khan, M.J.; Hariri, S.; Chen, S.; Siting, C.; Ji, X. Survey: Cybersecurity Vulnerabilities, Attacks and
Solutions in the Medical Domain. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 168774–168797. [CrossRef]
19. Kim, J.W.; Edemacu, K.; Jang, B. MPPDS: Multilevel Privacy-Preserving Data Sharing in a Collaborative eHealth System. IEEE
Access 2019 ,7, 109910–109923. [CrossRef]
20. Bouras, M.A.; Lu, Q.; Zhang, F.; Wan, Y.; Zhang, T.; Ning, H. Distributed Ledger Technology for eHealth Identity Privacy: State of
The Art and Future Perspective. Sensors 2020 ,20, 483. [CrossRef]
21. Seol, K.; Kim, Y.; Lee, E.; Seo, Y.; Baik, D. Privacy-Preserving Attribute-Based Access Control Model for XML-Based Electronic
Health Record System. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 9114–9128. [CrossRef]
22. Zhu, L.; Zhang, C.; Xu, C.; Liu, X.; Huang, C. An Efﬁcient and Privacy-Preserving Biometric Identiﬁcation Scheme in Cloud
Computing. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 19025–19033. [CrossRef]
23. Qadir, J.; Mujeeb-U-Rahman, M.; Rehmani, M.H.; Pathan, A.S.K.; Imran, M.A.; Hussain, A.; Rana, R.; Luo, B. IEEE Access Special
Section Editorial: Health Informatics for the Developing World. IEEE Access 2017 ,5, 27818–27823. [CrossRef]
24. Yeh, K.H. A Secure IoT-Based Healthcare System with Body Sensor Networks. IEEE Access 2016 ,4, 10288–10299. [CrossRef]
25. Islam, S.M.R.; Kwak, D.; Kabir, M.H.; Hossain, M.; Kwak, K. The Internet of Things for Health Care: A Comprehensive Survey.
IEEE Access 2015 ,3, 678–708. [CrossRef]
26. Tahir, A.; Chen, F.; Khan, H.U.; Ming, Z.; Ahmad, A.; Nazir, S.; Shaﬁq, M. A Systematic Review on Cloud Storage Mechanisms
Concerning e-Healthcare Systems. Sensors 2020 ,20, 5392. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
27. Vilela, P .H.; Rodrigues, J.J.P .C.; Righi, R.R.; Kozlov, S.; Rodrigues, V .F. Looking at Fog Computing for E-Health through the Lens
of Deployment Challenges and Applications. Sensors 2020 ,20, 2553. [CrossRef]
28. Haque, R.U.; Hasan, A.S.M.T.; Jiang, Q.; Qu, Q. Privacy-Preserving K-Nearest Neighbors Training over Blockchain-Based
Encrypted Health Data. Electronics 2020 ,9, 2096. [CrossRef]
29. Stamatellis, C.; Papadopoulos, P .; Pitropakis, N.; Katsikas, S.; Buchanan, W.J. A Privacy-Preserving Healthcare Framework Using
Hyperledger Fabric. Sensors 2020 ,20, 6587. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
30. Yaqoob, T.; Abbas, H.; Atiquzzaman, M. Security Vulnerabilities, Attacks, Countermeasures, and Regulations of Networked
Medical Devices—A Review. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor. 2019 ,21, 3723–3768. [CrossRef]
31. Seh, A.H.; Zarour, M.; Alenezi, M.; Sarkar, A.K.; Agrawal, A.; Kumar, R.; Ahmad Khan, R. Healthcare Data Breaches: Insights and
Implications. Healthcare 2020 ,8, 133. [CrossRef]
32. Liu, H.; Crespo, R.G.; Mart ínez, O.S. Enhancing Privacy and Data Security across Healthcare Applications Using Blockchain and
Distributed Ledger Concepts. Healthcare 2020 ,8, 243. [CrossRef]
33. Dang, L.M.; Piran, M.J.; Han, D.; Min, K.; Moon, H. A Survey on Internet of Things and Cloud Computing for Healthcare.
Electronics 2019 ,8, 768. [CrossRef]
34. Huang, Q.; Yue, W.; He, Y.; Yang, Y. Secure Identity-Based Data Sharing and Proﬁle Matching for Mobile Healthcare Social
Networks in Cloud Computing. IEEE Access 2018 ,6, 36584–36594. [CrossRef]
35. Celesti, A.; Fazio, M.; Gal án Márquez, F.; Glikson, A.; Mauwa, H.; Bagula, A.; Celesti, F.; Villari, M. How to Develop IoT Cloud
e-Health Systems Based on FIWARE: A Lesson Learnt. J. Sens. Actuator Netw. 2019 ,8, 7. [CrossRef]
36. Schiza, E.C.; Kyprianou, T.C.; Petkov, N.; Schizas, C.N. Proposal for an eHealth Based Ecosystem Serving National Healthcare.
IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2019 ,23, 1346–1357. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
37. Lin, H.-Y.; Jiang, Y.-R. A Multi-User Ciphertext Policy Attribute-Based Encryption Scheme with Keyword Search for Medical
Cloud System. Appl. Sci. 2020 ,11, 63. [CrossRef]
Symmetry 2021 ,13, 742 14 of 14
38. Mehmood, Z.; Ghani, A.; Chen, G.; Alghamdi, A.S. Authentication and Secure Key Management in E-Health Services: A Robust
and Efﬁcient Protocol Using Biometrics. IEEE Access 2019 ,7, 113385–113397. [CrossRef]
39. Khezr, S.; Yassine, M.A.; Benlamri, R. Blockchain Technology in Healthcare: A Comprehensive Review and Directions for Future
Research. Appl. Sci. 2019 ,9, 1736. [CrossRef]
40. Li, H.; Yang, Y.; Dai, Y.; Yu, S.; Xiang, Y. Achieving Secure and Efﬁcient Dynamic Searchable Symmetric Encryption over Medical
Cloud Data. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 2020 ,8, 484–494. [CrossRef]
41. Zhang, R.; Xue, R.; Liu, L. Searchable Encryption for Healthcare Clouds: A Survey. IEEE Trans. Serv. Comput. 2018 ,11,
978–996. [CrossRef]
42. Edemacu, K.; Jang, B.; Kim, J.W. Collaborative Ehealth Privacy and Security: An Access Control with Attribute Revocation Based
on OBDD Access Structure. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform. 2020 ,24, 2960–2972. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
43. Tong, Y.; Sun, J.; Chow, S.S.M.; Li, P . Cloud-Assisted Mobile-Access of Health Data with Privacy and Auditability. IEEE J. Biomed.
Health Inform. 2014 ,18, 419–429. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Kurdi, H.; Alsalamah, S.; Alatawi, A.; Alfaraj, S.; Altoaimy, L.; Ahmed, S.H. HealthyBroker: A Trustworthy Blockchain-Based
Multi-Cloud Broker for Patient-Centered eHealth Services. Electronics 2019 ,8, 602. [CrossRef]
45. Zhang, Y.; Xu, C.; Li, H.; Yang, K.; Zhou, J.; Lin, X. HealthDep: An Efﬁcient and Secure Deduplication Scheme for Cloud-Assisted
eHealth Systems. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inform. 2018 ,14, 4101–4112. [CrossRef]
46. Yeh, L.; Chiang, P .; Tsai, Y.; Huang, J. Cloud-Based Fine-Grained Health Information Access Control Framework for Lightweight-
IoT Devices with Dynamic Auditing andAttribute Revocation. IEEE Trans. Cloud Comput. 2018 ,6, 532–544. [CrossRef]
47. Avila, K.; Sanmartin, P .; Jabba, D.; Jimeno, M. Applications Based on Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) in the Field of Home
Healthcare. Sensors 2017 ,17, 1703. [CrossRef]
48. Guo, L.; Zhang, C.; Sun, J.; Fang, Y. A Privacy-Preserving Attribute-Based Authentication System for Mobile Health Networks.
IEEE Trans. Mob. Comput. 2014 ,13, 1927–1941. [CrossRef]
49. Liu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Ling, J.; Liu, Z. Secure and ﬁnegrained access control on e-healthcare records in mobile cloud comp ting. Future
Gener. Comput. Syst 2017 ,78, 1020–1026.
50. Elgendi, M.; Al-Ali, A.; Mohamed, A.; Ward, R. Improving Remote Health Monitoring: A Low-Complexity ECG Compression
Approach. Diagnostics 2018 ,8, 10. [CrossRef]
51. Liagkou, V .; Kavvadas, V .; Chronopoulos, S.K.; Taﬁadis, D.; Christoﬁlakis, V .; Peppas, K.P . Attack Detection for Healthcare Moni-
toring Systems Using Mechanical Learning in Virtual Private Networks over Optical Transport Layer Architecture. Computation
2019 ,7, 24. [CrossRef]
52. AbuKhousa, E.; Mohamed, N.; Al-Jaroodi, J. e-Health Cloud: Opportunities and Challenges. Future Internet 2012 ,4, 621–645. [CrossRef]
53. Sahmin, S.; Gharsellaoui, H. Privacy and Security in Internet-based Computing—Cloud Computing, Internet of Things, Cloud of
Things: A review. Procedia Comput. Sci. 2017 ,112, 1516–1522. [CrossRef]
