The 2019 Delaware State Police Annual Report is dedicated to 
the members of the Delaware State Police who have made the 
ultimate sacrifice while protecting the citizens and visitors of the 
State of Delaware.
Patrolman Francis Ryan
Sergeant Thomas H. Lamb
Trooper Paul H. Sherman
Corporal Leroy L. Lekites
Corporal James D. Orvis
Corporal Raymond B. Wilhelm
Trooper William F. Mayer
Trooper First Class Harold B. Rupert
Trooper Robert A. Paris
Colonel Eugene B. Ellis
Trooper William C. Keller
Trooper Ronald L. Carey
Trooper David C. Yarrington
Trooper George W. Emory
Lieutenant William I. Jearman
Corporal David B. Pulling
Trooper Kevin J. Mallon
Trooper Gerard T. Dowd
Corporal Robert H. Bell
Corporal Francis T. Schneible
Trooper Sandra M. Wagner
Corporal Frances M. Collender
Corporal Christopher M. Shea
Corporal Stephen J. Ballard
2  Delaware State Police
To enhance the quality  
of life for all Delaware citizens  
and visitors by providing  
professional, competent  
and compassionate law  
enforcement services.
 HONOR  INTEGRITY   COURAGE  LOYALTY  
 ATTITUDE   DISCIPLINE   SERVICE 
2019 Annual Report  3Mission Statement
4  Delaware State Police

2019 Annual Report  5
 It is my honor, as the Superintendent of the Delaware State Police, to present our 2019 Annual Report. This year provides 
another opportunity to share and document the dedication and exemplary service and commitment of the men and women of 
the Delaware State Police throughout the previous year. We are thankful for the leadership and continued support of Governor 
John Carney, Secretary of the Department of Safety and Homeland Security Kimberly Chandler and former Secretary Robert 
Coupe, and the members of the General Assembly. It is their support as well as the support of our citizens that contributes to 
the safety of our state to the accomplishment of our all-important mission.
 Delaware State Police remains at the forefront of modern policing in our efforts to build and maintain safe communities. 
We continue to implement best practices and utilize the best available technology to equip our troopers to maintain their safety 
and to protect the public. In 2019, the Delaware State Police created a full-time Special Operations Response Team. The full 
time team is able to make immediate responses to critical incidents.
 During 2019, the Delaware State Police continued to embrace technology to improve our effectiveness and efficiency. To 
further enhance our (SPEAR) State Police Enhanced Analytical Response Program the Delaware State Police fully imple -
mented Aventos Smart Force Technology. The implementation of SMART Force Technology allows for mobile integration 
and improved communication, de-confliction and collaboration and will enable Delaware State Police to Advance well into 
the future. The Smart force solution will improve our overall effectiveness and efficiency and it will enhance and support our 
(SPEAR) program.
 The evidence based SPEAR model continues to prove effective in addressing crime and traffic safety concerns. Similar to  
previous year, 2019 saw a 4.3% reduction in Part 1 crimes (most serious offenses) in our state. Utilizing the Stratified Policing 
Model, our Troopers achieved a 8.6% reduction in Robberies, 11.7% reduction in Burglaries, and a 6.2% reduction in Thefts. 
Many of these reductions represent the lowest total on record. Of equal significance, our case solving efforts remain a  
priority. Of all the violent crimes reported to Delaware Troopers, nearly 75.4% were solved through our investigations. This 
far exceeds the national average of approximately 45%.
 The Delaware State Police continue to focus on driver education, enforcement and collision data analysis to enhance traf-
fic safety.  In our pursuit of driver and highway safety, we collaborate with our partners at the Office of Highway Safety, 
the Department of Transportation and all of our allied law enforcement agencies.  Troopers also made a concerted effort to 
improve proactive drug investigations and proactive DUI enforcement. Our collective efforts resulted in a 20.3 % increase in 
proactive drug investigations and a 10.5 % increase in Proactive DUI enforcement removing drunk drivers from our highways 
prior to being involved in a DUI related crash. While there was an increase in fatal accidents, Troopers investigated a total of 
21,507 collisions on Delaware roadways resulting in a overall reduction of 1.3% from the previous year.
 The number of crashes involving alcohol decreased by 3.7%. The rate of alcohol involvement in fatal crashes decreased by 
1.8%. As we seek to increase the complement of safe drivers, vehicles and roadways in Delaware, we stand ready to address 
emerging highway safety trends and challenges. 
 The Delaware State Police continues to focus on strengthening community partnerships and serving vulnerable populations. 
In 2019 Delaware State Police continued our educational partnership with Attack Addiction. We also established a partnership 
with The Division of Substance Abuse and Mental Health to coordinate service for those impacted by Substance Abuse and 
Mental Health. 
 In addition to our Annual Divisional awards and our Trooper of The Year honoree (Corporal/1 Jean) and Civilian of The 
Year (Mrs. Corrie Smith) annual award winner, Troopers also received National recognition for their dedication and commit -
ment to Law enforcement. Sergeant John Lloyd was honored by the International Association of Chiefs of Police (IACP) as a 
40 under 40 award winner as part of an incredibly talented, accomplished and dedicated group of individuals who demonstrate 
6  Delaware State Policeleadership and exemplify a deep commitment to the profession. Master Corporal Lawrence Walther was also recognized by the 
(IACP) as the 2019 Instructor of the Year.
 The year 2019 also saw construction completed on a new troop facility. The new Troop 7 facility located at 19444 Mulberry 
Knoll road became fully operational on December 18, 2019.  The State of the art facility is the result of a multi-year project 
culminating the efforts of many agencies.  This Troop will replace the previous location on State Route 1 that served as Troop 7 
since 1983. The 24,000-square foot facility located on 9 acres will house more than 60 personnel including administrative per -
sonnel, patrol operations and the collision reconstruction unit.  The Troop also has a large community room that is available to 
the community. This facility represents the future of policing in Sussex County and in the State. 
 As the men and women of the Delaware State Police continue our commitment to public safety, we look forward to working 
together with our allied agencies, our elected officials, and our citizenry to provide the best possible law enforcement services 
in Delaware throughout 2020.  
         Sincerely,
         Colonel Nathaniel McQueen, Jr.
         Superintendent

Lt. Colonel Melissa Zebley
Deputy SuperintendentColonel Nathaniel McQueen
Superintendent
Major Daniel Meadows
Special Operations OfficerMajor Robert Hudson
Administrative Officer
Major Sean Moriarty
South Operations Officer
Executive Staff
2019 Annual Report  7
Major Matthew Cox
North Operations Officer
Mission Statement  .............. Page 3
Table of Organization  ........... Page 9
Troop 1 ...................... Page 11
Troop 2  ..................... Page 12
Troop 3 ...................... Page 14
Troop 4 ...................... Page 16
Troop 5 ...................... Page 17
Troop 6 ...................... Page 18
Troop 7 ...................... Page 19
Troop 9 ...................... Page 20
Aviation  ..................... Page 22
Communications Section ........ Page 22
Criminal Intelligence Section  .... Page 23
Critical Incident Stress  
 Management Team .......... Page 24
Division of Gaming Enforcement  .Page 25
Executive Protection Unit ....... Page 26
Fiscal Control Section .......... Page 26
Homicide Unit ................ Page 27
Honor Guard Unit ............. Page 28
Human Resources Office ........ Page 28
Information Technology Section ..Page 29
Legal Section ................. Page 30
Legislative Liaison ............. Page 30Office of Professional
 Responsibility .............. Page 31
Pipes & Drums ................ Page 32
Planning and Research Section  ...Page 32
Public Information Office  ....... Page 33
Purchasing and Supply Office/  
 Graphics Office  ............ Page 34
Special Operations Section  ...... Page 34
State Bureau of Identification  .... Page 37
Traffic Operations ............. Page 38
Training Academy ............. Page 39
Transportation  ................ Page 39
Victim Services Section ......... Page 40
2019 Trooper of the Year ........ Page 41
2019 Civilian of the Year ........ Page 41Table of Contents
8  Delaware State Police
2019 Annual Report  9                DELAWARE  STATE POLICE  
                  TABLE OF ORGANIZATION  
 Acting Secretary  
       Kimberly Chandler   
Colo nel 
Nathaniel  McQueen , Jr. 
 
Major  
Daniel K. Meadows  
Special Op erations  Major  
Rober t A. Hudson  
Administrat ive Major  
 Matthew E. Cox  
North Operations  Lt Colonel  
Melissa A. Zebley  
 Legal  
PIO 
Leg Liaison  
Diversity  Council  OPR  
Planning  
Information Technology 
CJIS Security, Audit & Training  
Troop  1 Full Time  
Units  
Troop  2 Troop  3 
Troop 4 
Troop  5 Troop  9 
Troop  7 Troop  6 
Communication s Traffic  Human Resources  
Training/Academy  
SBI Fiscal Control  
Purchasing/ Supply  
Bldg M aintenance  Transportation  Budget  
Graphics  Firearms  
DV Coord inator  
Vic Serv ices Part Time 
Units  
 
Honor Guard  Conflict 
Manage ment  
 
EOD  
Scuba  
SORT  
TCU  Aviation  
DGE  
Intell igence  
Homeland  
Security  
HTCU /ICAC  
ESU  
DIAC /RTCC  
Homicide  
Crime Lab  
FFSU  CIU T2  
CMVEU  
(Commerci al 
Motor Vehicle 
Enforcement 
Unit)  
3/20/2020  
 CISM  Maritime  Major  
Sean E. Moriarty  
South O perations  
CIU T 3 
CIU T4  
HQ Comm  
RECOM  
KENTCO M
 
SUSCOM  
Command Post  SORT  
Mounted Patrol 
Unit  
 
 EPU  
Canine  Pipes & Drums  Traffic Signal 
Enforcement 
Section  
 Table of Organization
10  Delaware State Police Crime Data
2019 Divisional Goals

2019 Annual Report  11The “First Troop in the First State” has been an icon, located at the top of Penny Hill since 1923. Penny Hill has a rich history of 
tradition and outstanding public service. The forty-four troopers currently assigned to Troop 1 performed exceptionally during this 
past year to provide professional and compassionate public service to an increasingly diverse population. This diversity spans from 
Wilmington to Claymont, and Brandywine Hundred to Centreville. The patrol area also includes two interstate highways, as well as 
the Concord Pike corridor, which has become a regional retail magnet, and the site of the world-wide headquarters for Astra Zeneca.  
Troop 1 continues to work with the community and business leaders on both small and large events, such as the Winterthur Point-to-
Point event that draws almost 15,000 attendees.
In 2019, Troop 1 continued the Division’s Stratified Model Program, known as the State Police Enhanced Analytical Response 
(S.P.E.A.R.). Throughout the years, Troop 1 Troopers have remained engaged with the increased levels of accountability to both 
criminal and traffic issues. From the beginning of the program in 2015, one of the top spots for daytime criminal activity was identi -
fied as RT 202 Concord Pike, specifically shoplifting and thefts along the corridor, which required a multi-pronged approach. During 
the nighttime hours, burglaries both commercial and residential became an increased focus and were patrolled in high volume to 
decrease these types of crimes.
Troop 1 crime fighting and prevention efforts have been directed by Lieutenant Sean Duffy. Troop 1 experienced a 22.6% reduction 
in thefts, which is the lowest total on record. Daily analysis is performed to identify hot spots, micro hot spots and top store locations  Troop 1  - Captain John Laird, Jr.

12  Delaware State Policethat are being targeted by suspects. As these issues appear, a strategy is created by the Troop Administration and carried out by the 
Troopers.
Troop 1 traffic initiatives and enforcement have been directed by Lieutenant Roger Davis. Lt. Davis targeted and led traffic initiatives 
with funding from the Office of Highway Safety and the D.S.P. Traffic Section. As previously stated above, the utilization of the 
Stratified Model further focused the strategy and deployment for dealing with the traffic issues in the Troop 1 area.
Troop 1 Administration and Troopers continue to engage with the community in a variety of locations and venues. For 2019, Troop 
1 Troopers participated in numerous community events, and/or meetings to include events for Special Olympics, A.I. Hospital visits, 
community meetings, Law Enforcement Memorial Run, Claymont Holiday parade, DSP Explorer’s meetings and senior safety talks.  
Troop 1 also continued to host Community Café events throughout the Troop 1 area. The Community Café events provided citizens 
the opportunity to interact with the Troop 1 Administration and discuss issues impacting their local community.
Troop 1 is well known as a very cohesive, close knit unit of hard working Troopers who consistently go well above and beyond what 
is expected; and their effort, hard work, dedication and results during 2019 are nothing short of exceptional.
The ‘new’ Troop 2, built in 2002 is located at recently dedicated Cpl/1 Stephen J. Ballard Way, and is responsible for primary cov-
erage of approximately 100 square miles of Troop area that runs from Interstate 95 to the C&D Canal (North to South) and from the 
City of Wilmington/Delaware River to the Maryland Line (East to West).
During 2019, Lieutenant Edward Schiavi served as the Deputy Troop Commander/Criminal Lieutenant while Lieutenant Scott Slover 
served as the Traffic Lieutenant. Sergeant’s Gregory Earle, Alison Meadows, Jayson Jeffers, J. Paul Doherty and William Harris 
supervised the Troopers assigned to the four patrol shifts.
In 2019, oversight of the Troop’s vehicle fleet was conducted by Lt. Scott Slover. In addition to this responsibility, he also oversaw 
the New Castle County Collision Reconstruction Unit (C.R.U.) which is tasked with investigating fatal motor vehicle crashes,  
  Troop 2 Patrol  - Captain Jason Sapp

2019 Annual Report  13departmental collisions and other significant injury related crashes. The C.R.U. team is staffed with four highly trained investigators 
and supervised by Sergeant Dermot Alexander.
The Collision Reconstruction Unit investigated a total of 42 fatal collisions throughout New Castle County in 2019; as well as sev-
eral departmental and pedestrian collisions. Of the 42 total fatal collisions, 11 occurred in Troop 2’s area, 15 involved pedestrians. 
Patrol Officers took a proactive approach to addressing and positively impacting the fatal crash picture here at Troop 2 by identifying 
and stopping impaired drivers and those committing moving violations on our roadways.
Troop 2 patrol officers handled over 20,000 various incidents throughout 2019. The Troop Administration also took a multi-faceted 
approach to addressing area nuisance properties by partnering with local legislators and the Attorney General’s Office.
The Troop 2 Administration was assisted on a daily basis by Administrative Specialist Kelly Tush, Physical Plant Maintenance 
Specialist Jeffrey Miller and Automotive Mechanics Scott Warren and Brian Freshwater. These professionals served as critical ele -
ments of the Troop’s overall success.
During the course of 2019, Troop 2 personnel remained committed to staying connected to our local communities by attending com-
munity meetings; participating in various events like Special Olympics; hosting monthly AtTAcK Addiction Reality Tours; and by 
facilitating an Explorer’s Post- which exposes young adults to the law enforcement profession. The Troop Administration also part-
nered with area businesses, such as SIMM Associates in Newark, DE, to host Coffee with the Commander. This initiative gives our 
citizens an opportunity to engage with the Troop Administration, ask questions and socialize.
The Troopers at State Police Troop 2 look forward to a safe and prosperous 2020. Our hope is that hard work, community partner -
ships and thoughtful approaches to policing will result in safer roadways and a reduction in the core crimes that affect the quality of 
life for Delaware residents and its visitors.
The Criminal Investigative Unit (CIU) for New Castle County is located at Troop 2 and provides investigative support to the four 
patrol troops in New Castle County. The CIU is under the command of Captain Melissa Hukill, Lieutenant Millard Greer and 
Lieutenant Robert Jones with administrative assistance provided by Ms. Gail Willoughby.
CIU’s primary focus is to provide “detective” operations throughout the county. Detectives leverage modern technological resources 
to deploy resources, identify suspects and locate stolen property. Detectives are tasked with quickly identifying crime trends in order 
to identify the perpetrators and take them into custody, preventing future crimes, which often come with escalated violence.
CIU is currently staffed with seventy-five (75) sworn Troopers, two (2) Civilian Auto Theft Technicians, one (1) Agent assigned to 
the Drug Diversion Unit, and three (3) Probation Officers assigned to the Governor’s Task Force. CIU has the investigative responsi-
bility for everything from quality-of-life issues that affect our citizens to the investigation of any serious criminal offenses that occur 
in New Castle County.
• During 2019, CIU detectives handed a total of 2,811 initial and follow-up cases to include Robbery, Rape, Attempted Murder,  
 Aggravated Assault, Burglary, Death Investigations, Felony Theft and others.
• Our Property and Robbery Units investigated 25 violent crime trends, closing 18 with the arrests of the perpetrators. This is in  
 addition to the large volume of other robbery and property cases investigated and successfully closed with an arrest.
• Our Major Crimes Unit investigated 227 cases which include 52 rapes, 3 shootings and 82 death investigations. This includes an  
 Attempted Murder that occurred at the Market Street Grill in Wilmington. The Victim is a well-known drug dealer and racketeer.  
 He is also one of the most dangerous persons in the city of Wilmington. The Victim and his friend were both shot and seriously  
 injured. The Suspect fled the scene, and is still at large. As a result of this incident, there have been many retaliatory shootings  
 across the city, causing a task force to be assembled to combat the issue. Several other crimes have been found to be related to this  
 case, and Det. Carroll has taken enforcement action.
• Our Evidence Detection Unit handled 529 crime scenes/criminalistics requests and obtained 94 print hits on active cases.
• Our Drug and GTF units seized over 7.3 kilograms of cocaine, over 2.1 kilograms of heroin, 90 pounds of marijuana, 89 illegal   Troop 2 CIU  - Captain Melissa Hukill
14  Delaware State Police guns, and $575,000 in seized currency and other property used in the illegal drug trade. Additionally, 459 criminal complaints  
 were investigated resulting in 734 criminal arrests.
Beginning in July of 2017, CIU has coordinated (14) crime blitzes in New Castle County hot spots. These initiative were worked 
jointly with our partners from Wilmington Police, NCCPD, Newport PD, Middletown PD and DOC to address crime issues that 
cross jurisdictional boundaries, to include the city of Wilmington. These efforts led to the arrest of 636 defendants, the clearance of 
777 outstanding warrants and capiases, significant seizures of illegal drugs and 20 firearms off the street. Another initiative that tar -
geted prostitution and human trafficking via the Internet resulted in the arrest of 104 individuals.
Our (22) School Resource Officers continue to provide safety and mentorship to thousands of students throughout New Castle 
County. In 2019, a total of 999 school related complaints were handled by School Resource Officers and Youth Aid Detectives. 
Troop 2 CIU created a School Safety Assessment which is being utilized in middle and high schools to improve school safety.
The detectives at the Troop 2 CIU look forward to the challenges to come in 2020 and through their on-going training and experi-
ence, will continue to serve the citizens and visitors of the state in an exemplary and professional manner by providing competent 
and compassionate law enforcement services and furthering the division’s crime reduction goals.
Troop 3 is commanded by Captain Rodney M. Layfield, and consists of ninety-six sworn officers and five civilian support staff. The 
facility is home to a Patrol Division lead by Lt. Kerry Reinbold, a Criminal Investigative Division lead by Lt. Gerald Windish and 
the Special Investigations Division lead by Lt. William Thompson.
The Patrol Division is comprised of forty-eight uniformed troopers who actively patrol from south Dover to Sussex County and from 
the Delaware Bay to the Maryland state line. The majority of their work entails investigating crashes, domestic violence incidents 
and investigating criminal offenses. Working alongside the patrol division with regard to serious and fatal crashes is the Collision 
Reconstruction Unit (CRU). CRU is tasked with investigating all fatal, serious, complex and departmental crashes.
 Troop 3  - Captain Rodney M. Layfield
2019 Annual Report  15The Criminal Investigative Division consists of twenty-five detectives who are assigned to several units including Major Crimes, 
Property Crimes, Domestic Violence, Fraud, Youth Aid and the Evidence Detection Unit. These detectives investigate felonious crime 
of a more serious nature. Additionally, three detectives are assigned as School Resource Officers (SRO) at Lake Forest High School, 
Caesar Rodney High School and Polytech High School.
The Special Investigative Division consists of fourteen detectives who comprise the Drug Unit and Governor’s Task Force. The Drug 
Unit is responsible for the investigation of drug distribution organizations and their networks. The Governor’s Task Force (GTF) is 
a proactive street crimes unit that works in partnership with Probation and Parole officers focusing their enforcement on high-risk 
repeat offenders. In addition to providing traditional police services, Troop 3 provides event security and law enforcement services 
for the Delaware State Fair, two NASCAR races and the Firefly Music Festival.
Equally important to our crime fighting and traffic enforcement measures is our commitment to suppress and prevent crime through 
our Community Outreach and Engagement efforts. In 2019, Troop 3 embarked on several community based programs to build trust, 
open lines of communication, foster positive and open relationships that are inclusive of all citizens and the police, all aimed at crime 
reduction and making our communities as safe as possible. Programs including STaRS, Honorary Commander, Community Café’s, 
It’s Cool to go back to School and working with Meals on Wheels. Having our Mounted Patrol Unit patrolling on horseback in many 
of our communities and Operation Troopers have Your BACkpack are also some examples. These pro-active efforts allow our troop-
ers to engage the community in non-traditional law enforcement ways that leads to a better understanding of the DSP, builds trust 
amongst our communities, and legitimizes our role as law enforcement officers while providing a better understanding of the various 
cultures that exist within our communities across Kent County.
The men and woman of Troop 3 truly appreciate the support and partnerships we share within the residential and business communi -
ties we serve and look forward to serving the citizens of Kent County in 2020.

16  Delaware State PoliceTroop 4, situated along US Route 113, south of Georgetown, houses both uniformed patrol and criminal investigators. Troop 4 is 
commanded by Captain William D. Crotty and Lieutenants John McColgan, Kris Thompson and Mentino DiSilvestro. Troop 4 areas 
of responsibility span 349 square miles, serving the central southern portions of Sussex County. Patrol’s staffing is forty troopers and 
our criminal units are comprised of forty-five detectives. Criminal Investigations include major crimes, property crimes, fraud/finan -
cial crimes, school resource officers, evidence detection, polygraph, governor’s task force, drug unit, community outreach, victim 
services and court liaison.
Patrol troopers remained at the forefront of several proactive law enforcement initiatives implemented in the State Police Enhance 
Analytical Response Program to enhance public safety in the State of Delaware.
The Delaware State Police Major Crimes Unit at Troop 4 experienced yet another increase in investigations handled in 2019. The 
Major Crimes Unit is responsible for the apprehension and conviction of numerous offenders of sex related crimes, robberies and 
child abuse within Sussex County. Despite this elevated complaint load the Major Crimes Unit still achieve a high level of success. 
The Major Crimes Unit posted a 75% clearance rate for Aggravated Assaults and a 49.7% clearance rate for Robberies. Each of these 
clearance rates are well above the national averages.
The Delaware State Police Sussex County Drug Unit and GTF during 2019 developed a signification drug investigation to com-
bat the opioid epidemic in Sussex County. Together these units targeted a high level drug trafficker with “Operation Royal Flush”. 
“Operation Royal Flush” was a multi-state wiretap investigation involving the Worcester county Criminal Enforcement Team (CET), 
the Delaware State Police Kent County Drug Unit and the new full-time Delaware State Police Special Operations Response Team 
(S.O.R.T.). This extended wire intercept investigation culminated in the arrest of two high level drug trafficker who were in business 
to distribute “uncut” or “raw” Heroin. In total, detectives seized a total of 33.94 grams of heroin, 78 bags (.546 grams) of packaged 
and stamped heroin, 30.5 grams of marijuana, Oxycodone pills and $8,925 in the State of Delaware. This investigation was highly 
successful and had profound ramifications to suppress the illegal Heroin trade in Delaware and Maryland.
Troop 4 continued our long standing tradition of facilitating division programs at Camp Barnes. From its inception in 1947, the camp 
has provided youth with the opportunity to experience life at a traditional summer camp, with the hope of reducing and eliminating 
juvenile crime and delinquency. During the summer, under the direction of Master Corporal James “Shawn” Hatfield, over 400 chil -
dren age ten to thirteen attended the camp free of charge.
 Troop 4  - Captain William D. Crotty
2019 Annual Report  17Providing full law enforcement services to the citizens of western Sussex County, Troop 5 of the Delaware State Police is located 
east of US Route 13 and south of the intersection with State Route 404 in Bridgeville. Troop 5 patrols nearly 40% of Sussex County, 
covering 376 of Sussex County’s 972 square miles. The troop area is bordered by Maryland to the south and the west, running north 
to the Kent County line. The eastern boundary runs from US 113, to State Forest Road, to Rum Bridge Road, to East Trap Pond 
Road, to Whaleys Road.
Thirty two percent of the service calls were non-criminal and 30% were domestic-related. Diplomacy, problem-solving and resource 
referrals remained essential for daily service.
Effective case management and early investigative successes led to the reduction of illegal activity and increases in case resolution. 
Troop 5 focused on areas with the highest rates of criminal offenses and traffic crashes.
Troop 5 closed the year with a total of 36 patrol troopers, four sergeants, one Proactive Criminal Enforcement (PACE) trooper, 
one special-assignment trooper, three administrators, two civilian support staff and a Victim Services Specialist on-site. Transfers 
throughout 2019 brought Troop 5 significant staffing changes across the ranks. Captain Alice Brumbley served as troop commander, 
accompanied by Lieutenant Mary McGuire as criminal lieutenant and Lieutenant Mark Windsor following Lieutenant Lance Skinner 
as traffic lieutenant. After the retirement of Sergeant Nicole Oldham, Sergeants Kristin Willard and Mark Justice transferred to other 
assignments. Sergeants Michael Dill, India Sturgis, Jaime Dorsey-Sterner and Hudson Keller led each of Troop 5’s shifts, respective -
ly. Mechanic Kevin Covey and Administrative Specialist Laura Willey remained the team’s cohesive force.
Community involvement and public trust remain fundamental to Troop 5’s continued goal attainment. With assistance from the 
Community Outreach Unit, Troop 5 embarked on many activities. These included visiting school lunches, working with high school 
criminal justice students, partnering with Seaford for the Community Night Out Against Crime event, various donation drives and 
distribution, and relationship-building with Honorary Troop Commander Pastor Bob Carey, Executive Director of Delmarva Adult 
and Teen Challenge. The year concluded with Troop 5 Needy Family project, partnering with school districts, community leaders, 
and public agencies to identify 27 families and 32 students at the Elizabeth Murphey School for Christmas gift deliveries.
By fostering strong and transparent relationships with the community and by addressing the crime and traffic trends in an efficient, 
proactive manner, the hardworking men and women of Troop 5 will continue to provide professional, competent, and compassionate 
law enforcement services to Sussex County.
 Troop 5  - Captain Alice Brumbley
18  Delaware State PoliceTroop 6 continues to be one of the busiest troops in the state, covering an area of eighty-two square miles, with an estimated popu-
lation of 220,000 people. The troop area is comprised of a diverse socio-economic community, including citizens residing in the out-
skirts of Wilmington, Elsmere and, Newark, and the towns of Stanton, and Hockessin. This includes the busy I-95 corridor as well as 
the Christiana Mall and Fashion Center. The troop sits on the corner of Kirkwood Highway and Albertson Boulevard and has been a 
fixture in the area for over fifty years.
The troop currently has forty-five uniformed patrol troopers and three administrators. The command staff consists of Capt. Jennifer 
Griffin, Lt. Robert Wallace and Lt. Andrew Hudak. The administrative assistant is Ms. Donna Newth-Showell, and our mechanic is 
Mr. Scott Ferguson.
The Troop 6 Administration aligned its goals for 2019 with those of the Division. Keeping a steadfast focus on the metrics needed to 
achieve these objectives, Troop 6 found itself in a prime position to see a reduction in a variety of critical areas related to our day to 
day operations. Unfortunately, more than half of the State’s fatality crashes are a result of impaired driving. Troop 6 patrol focused 
its efforts on reducing fatalities through Impaired driving enforcement to stop impaired drivers before they crash. In addition to the 
proactive impaired driving enforcement, Troopers were able to decrease overall crashes, pedestrian crashes and fatalities. In addition 
to traffic successes, the troop posted reductions in shopliftings, robberies, and thefts while increasing theft clearance rates. These 
reductions are a testament to the dedication, work ethic, and quality investigations and traffic enforcement conducted by Troop 6 per -
sonnel throughout the year.
Troop 6 troopers attended numerous community events and civic association functions, in addition to hosting Community Café gath-
erings - an effort that yielded increased dialogue and interaction with the citizens within the troop area. We value our relationship 
with the customers we serve. This troop is composed of a group of highly motivated, energetic, and professional troopers. They func-
tion in a demanding sector of the state, handling a multitude of complaints ranging from traffic issues to criminal homicide. Their 
dedication and commitment is beyond question.
Troop 6 looks forward to continuing the delivery of professional, compassionate police services to the residents and visitors of our 
jurisdiction in 2020.
 Troop 6 - Captain Jennifer Griffin 
2019 Annual Report  19Delaware State Police Troop 7 provides full-service policing to the residents of the eastern third of Sussex County. Troop 7’s terri -
tory encompasses over 247 square miles. One of Delaware’s fastest growing regions, the troop area contrasts multi-million dollar 
oceanfront communities with some of the most economically disadvantaged areas in the state. The area includes the Route 1 corridor 
spanning from Milford to the Indian River Inlet, including the busy stretch between Lewes, Rehoboth and Dewey Beach. It also 
reaches west to farmland and densely-populated retirement communities, including Long Neck. Bordered by the Atlantic Ocean and 
the Delaware Bay, the area is a premier vacation destination, attracting hundreds of thousands of visitors annually.
In 2019, construction was completed on a new Troop 7 building located at 19444 Mulberry Knoll Road, Lewes. The building 
replaces the previous location on State Route 1 that has served as Troop 7 since 1983. The new facility became fully operational on 
December 18, 2019. This state of the art facility was designed to serve the growing population of eastern Sussex County.
In 2019, fifty-six uniformed troopers, three troop administrators and three civilian personnel served at Troop 7. The civilians were 
Administrative Specialist Yvonne Krause, Maureen Faries and Equipment Mechanic Michael Chorman.
Troop 7 utilizes a Pro-active Criminal Enforcement Team (PACE), which consists of a four person team targeting criminal offenders 
in the Troop 7 Territory. PACE works to develop information from community leaders and criminal informants to reduce crime in 
the Troop 7 area. ACE performs a multifaceted role for Troop 7. Their responsibilities include but are not limited to, address core 
crimes and organized retail theft cases, liaison with business owners, track known offenders and wanted subjects, gather intelligence 
from the community to suppress and solve crime and proactively target areas of high crime as directed by the administration using 
evidence based patrol strategies. Troop 7 also houses the county-wide Collision Reconstruction Unit (CRU), which is responsible for 
investigating fatal motor vehicle collisions, serious personal injury collisions, and departmental collisions.
Criminal operations in 2019 were led by Lieutenant Christy Ballinger. Under her leadership the Troop achieved a significant 
decrease in crime by reducing the core crimes of Robbery, Non-Family Aggravated Assault, Burglary, and Thefts. Troop 7 has also 
stayed well above the national average in clearance rates and saw a significant increase in clearance rates in the Troop 7 territo -
ry. In 2019, Troop 7 cleared 28% of reported burglaries, 61.3% of shopliftings, 37% of thefts, 64% of robberies, 56% of reported 
Shoplifting and 79% of aggravated assaults.
Traffic safety remained a top priority at Troop 7 under the leadership of Lieutenant Lance Skinner. Troop 7 investigated 2,195 traffic 
collisions in 2019 which is a .5% increase from 2018. The growing population expansion and development in the Troop 7 territory 
puts more motorists on the roadways increasing the likelihood of collision. Troop 7 uses aggressive enforcement and visibility in the 
areas of Route 1, where data shows most collisions are occurring. Troop 7 saw a 34% reduction in pedestrian crashes in 2019. Troop 
7 credits this reduction to the use of targeted enforcement, supplemental patrols funded by the Office of Highway Safety and educa -
tional programs targeting pedestrians and seasonal workers.
The Collision Reconstruction Unit investigated 47 fatal crashes and 31 serious injury collisions in Sussex County. In a continuing 
crash prevention effort, the CRU team facilitates many public outreach events, including child passenger safety seat clinics, and edu-
cational outreach to new student drivers.
By fostering strong and transparent relationships with the community and by addressing the crime and traffic trends in an effi-
cient and proactive manner, the hard working men and women of Troop 7 provide professional, competent and compassionate law 
enforcement services to Sussex County. Troop 7  - Captain Darren B. Short
20  Delaware State PoliceTroop 9, located in Odessa’s historic district, has proudly served as New Castle County’s Southernmost Troop since 1971. 
Throughout 2019, the Troopers assigned to Troop 9 continued their dedicated service to the citizens and visitors of southern New 
Castle County and northern Kent County. Thirty-six uniformed troopers and four civilian support personnel are assigned to the 
Troop.
Captain Daniel Hall has been the Troop Commander at Troop 9 since November of 2016. In 2019, Lieutenants Andrew Hudak 
and Lt. Philip Dzielak served as the Deputy Troop Commanders of Troop 9. Lt. Wes Barnett has served as the Traffic Lieutenant 
since October of 2019. He had previously served in that capacity at Troop 6. Lieutenant Andrew Lloyd was promoted to the rank of 
Lieutenant in October and assigned as Troop 9’s Criminal Lieutenant. He had previously been assigned to Troop 2 CIU and served 
as the Sergeant for the Robbery, Burglary, and Drug Units.
Traffic operations and enforcement are overseen by Lieutenant Wes Barnett. These efforts have a major impact on keeping our road-
ways safe and saving lives. Traffic enforcement also has a favorable impact on reducing the number of collisions. Troopers often 
focus their efforts on hot-spots, for example, areas that have seen an increase in collisions. In addition, Troopers also target speed-
ers, reckless, aggressive and drunk drivers. Throughout the year, Troopers partnered with the Office of Highway Safety conducting 
several initiatives that focused on targeting speeding, aggressive driving, DUI and pedestrian safety. During 2019, Troop 9 patrol 
reduced their pedestrian crashes by 11% which is the lowest since Troop realignment.
Criminal enforcement was under the oversight of Lieutenant Andrew Lloyd. Troopers on patrol responded to calls for service and 
focused on outward signs of criminal activity. Troopers were also vigilant in detecting less visible criminal activity while on patrol. 
Their efforts often resulted in the apprehension of criminals in the process of committing crimes. Troopers communicated daily with 
detectives assigned to Troop 3 and Troop 2 and other specialized units providing them continuous updates on what was happening 
on the streets. During 2019, Troop 9 Patrol Troopers authored 2,671 Crime Reports. Troop 9 troopers also completed a total of 7,012 
field service reports throughout 2019.
 Troop 9  - Captain Daniel Hall
2019 Annual Report  21Additionally, the administration at Troop 9 was assisted by the four Patrol Sergeants, who provide daily oversight to Troopers under 
their supervision. The role Sergeants Joseph Parker, Christopher Martin, Chris Sutton and Joshua Scaramazza played on a day to day 
basis was a crucial element to the success of Troop 9 during 2019.
The Troop 9 administration was assisted on a daily basis by Administrative Specialist Theresa Daniels, Physical Plant Maintenance 
Specialist Richard Daniels and Automotive Mechanic Kevin Spangler. Victim Service Specialist Veronica Colombo was also 
assigned to Troop 9 and worked closely with both Troop personnel and Detectives to facilitate the post-incident needs of our victims.  
Mrs. Colombo was the 2017 Civilian of the Year winner for the Delaware State Police. The civilian staff at Troop 9 is second to 
none and is critical to the message of our mission. The civilian staff is truly part of the DSP family and also serves as the backbone 
for the success of the members of Troop 9 patrol.
In addition to the service given on patrol, numerous Troop 9 personnel strengthen the community by participating in non-profit and 
charity events throughout the year. Some of these programs include the Special Olympics’ Torch Run, Polar Bear 5K, Polar Bear 
Plunge, Ride to the Tide, and served as coaches for various sports for Special Olympics Delaware. During many of these events, 
Troopers receive the honor of placing award medals around the necks of the participants and forge a partnership with the community 
through the direct contact. The Law Enforcement Memorial Run, Concerns of Police Survivors (COPS) Run and the National Police 
Memorial are other popular events among the Troopers and the participation level is strong.
Lastly, Troop 9 continues to maintain a proactive working relationship with the community. Troopers regularly attend community 
meetings in Odessa, Townsend and the Kent County Crime Watch meetings. The interaction with citizens and local politicians is a 
key element in creating and maintaining a partnership and establishing trust through communication. Troop 9 is also extremely proud 
of our partnership with the Appoquinimink School District, the district that serves the New Castle County portion of the Troop area.  
In 2019, Troop 9 personnel took part in numerous school safety initiatives throughout the district. Troop 9’s administration held sev-
eral Community Café’s with community members and politicians.
Troop 9 is fortunate to have so many hardworking men and women willing to work around the clock to protect our citizens and 
those visiting Delaware. The Troop 9 area is large and presents many diverse challenges. The Troopers at Troop 9, along with the 
civilian staff, consistently and professionally meet the demands and challenges that are presented to them by providing excellent ser -
vice to all.

22  Delaware State PoliceFor the Delaware State Police, 2019 marks the 49th year of the Aviation Section and the 34th year of our 
Trooper-Medic Program.
The Section consists of 32 pilots and medics providing 24-hour coverage from two locations (Georgetown 
and Middletown). During 2019 the Section flew 4,293 missions, transported 286 trauma patients and flew 
1,389 hours. The aircraft currently utilized include 4 helicopters and 1 fixed wing aircraft, a Cessna 182 
(1980).
The Aviation Section’s primary missions are to provide rapid transport of critically sick or injured persons to medical facilities and 
to support law enforcement ground personnel in the apprehension of criminal suspects. The Section also conducts search and rescue 
operations, airborne security for visiting dignitaries, homeland security operations, photographic missions, narcotics interdiction, 
pursuit support and maritime security to name a few of the many missions.
Pilot and Medic Training
The pilots attended training at Bell Helicopter in the Bell 429 aircraft. The training is essential in practicing emergency procedures of 
each aircraft and to keep each pilot proficient in the operation of each aircraft.
In 2019, the medics attended training to satisfy their continuing education credits needed to maintain their paramedic certifications.
DSP Tactical EMS Missions
The DSP Tactical Medic Mission provides medical support for the DSP Training Academy, Special Operation Response Team, 
Explosive Ordinance Disposal Unit and the SCUBA Team during high risk operations. In 2019, the DSP Tactical Medics had a total 
of 110 activations.
Automated External Defibrillator (AED) and Narcan Deployments:
Delaware State Police Aviation Section oversees the divisions AED and Narcan program. In 2019 Troopers deployed their 
Automated External Defibrillator (AED) 28 times/Narcan 39.
Infectious Disease Exposures:
For the 2019 calendar year the Delaware State Police had a total of 13 confirmed infectious disease exposures.
The Communications Section consists of three 9-1-1 Public Safety Answering Points (PSAPs), the Headquarters Communications 
Center and a Management Team. The section is staffed by ninety-six employees and is responsible for:
• Answering 9-1-1 emergency lines and dispatching law enforcement personnel and equipment
• NCIC & NLETS control, alarm monitoring and alerting on-call teams
• Telecommunications administration including statewide radio, telephone, cellular and pager systems
• Mobile command center operations
The DSP 911 Center operations are co-located in each of the County Centers. Here is a breakdown of the activities for 2019:
       
RECOM   (Staffing 24 Full time and 1 Casual Seasonal Position)
• Total Incidents Dispatched   79,969
• Total Incidents Handled Without Dispatch  54,985  Aviation  - Captain Charles Condon
 Communications Section  - Joseph E. Mulford
• Total Incidents Handled    134,954
• Total 9-1-1 Calls Received   378,270
• Total Admin Calls    111,065
KENTCOM (Staffing 24 Full time and 1 Casual Seasonal Position)
• Total Incidents Dispatched   86,583
• Total Incidents Handled Without Dispatch  22,765
• Total Incidents Handled    109,348
• Total 9-1-1 Calls Received   93,369
• Total DSP Admin Calls    82,997
SUSCOM  (Staffing 24 Full time and 1 Casual Seasonal Position)
• Total Incidents Dispatched   93,405
• Total Incidents Handled Without Dispatch  31,659
• Total Incidents Handled    125,064
• Total 9-1-1 Calls Received   109,786
• Total Admin Calls    119,935
HQ Communication is located at the DEMA building in Smyrna. There are 14 Full time Center personnel. Some of the Centers 
responsibilities are for State-wide data entry into DelJis and monitoring the 24x7x365 NCIC Inlets position. The center personnel 
monitor the Salem Nuclear plant, State Building Alarm systems, and are the State center for the RisSafe program. They also take 
after hour calls for the Medical Examiner’s office and Victim Services.
2019 HQComm Totals   Total  Monthly Avg.
RISSafe Conflicts   2  0.16
RISSafe Operations by DE Agencies 488  12
RISSafe Operations entered by HQComm 299  24.91
ME Calls    3,299  274.9
Victim Services    354  29.5
The Communication Management team consists of the Chief of Communication, Asst. Chief of Communication, and a Manager for 
each Center. (6 Full time)
The Delaware State Police Criminal Intelligence section, Homeland Security section and Real Time Crime Center are statewide sup-
port units under the overall command of Captain Joshua A. Bushweller. The Homeland Security Unit, which includes the Delaware 
Information and Analysis Center (DIAC), is supervised by Lt. Tim Hulings, the Criminal Intelligence section, which includes various 
investigative and support units is supervised by Lt. Dan Sponaugle and Lt. Jeremiah Lloyd is responsible for oversight of the Real 
Time Crime Center (RTCC), which encompasses special projects. Each of these units have statewide operational responsibility and 
provide investigative and technical assistance to the patrol and criminal investigative troops as well as other law enforcement agen-
cies across the state.
The Criminal Intelligence section is comprised of the Electronic Surveillance Unit (ESU), the High Technology Crimes Unit 
(HTCU), the Internet Crimes Against Children Task Force (ICACTF) as well several task force officers. These officers work in 
partnership with several federal agencies such as the United States Marshalls Service, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and 
Explosives and the Federal Bureau of Investigations. We also continue a state partnership dedicated to the investigation of firearms 
violence in Delaware.
In 2019, the section continued a program to deploy three sworn member of the Division as “Criminal Intelligence Officers.” These 
Troopers are designed to fully take advantage of information available through a variety of methods and leverage that information 
in the furtherance of solving crime. These Troopers also provide ongoing training to assets in the field regarding responsible intelli -
gence collection and the value of that information. This program has been a great success contributing to increased clearance of 
2019 Annual Report  23 Criminal Intelligence Section  - Captain Joshua A. Bushweller
crime through partnership with criminal investigators. These Troopers have also been instrumental in providing reporting to DSP 
leadership to aid in the deployment of resources in response to crime events and trends.
The Homeland Security Unit consists of the state designated fusion center, Delaware Information and Analysis 
Center (DIAC), the DSP/FBI JTTF component and the DSP Maritime Unit. DIAC provides analytic and intel -
ligence services to law enforcement partners, public safety and government partners as well as private sector 
partners throughout the state and region. DIAC also works with the Delaware Emergency Management Agency 
in our state’s prevention, preparedness, response, recovery and mitigation to natural, biological and technological 
hazards. Services provided by DIAC to our partners include:
The Delaware State Police Intelligence Terrorism Liaison Program is managed by Cpl/3 Tim Kerstetter. Tim was instrumental in 
providing training and education to a wide array of private and public disciplines on matters of homeland security on numerous 
occasions throughout the State of Delaware. This information includes specific information about the various threats that face our 
homeland. He has also been vigilant in training law enforcement, first responders and private sector partners in the pre-operational 
indicators prior to a terrorist event. In today’s climate, considering the significant increase of adverse events in the United States and 
abroad, this role is vital to the safety and security of our state and nation.
The Criminal Intelligence Unit and Critical Infrastructure Unit made valuable contributions to ensuring the safety of the critical infra-
structure sites in Delaware. Mr. Ron Bounds coordinates these efforts and is a dedicated professional conducting vulnerability assess-
ments and managing special projects.
The DSP Maritime Unit was created to protect the critical infrastructure and key resources along Delaware’s waterways. The unit is 
currently staffed with three troopers on a full-time basis. Additionally, three additional troopers have been outfitted and trained in the 
unit’s operations and assist the full-time members in addition to their current road patrol assignments.
The unit focuses on critical infrastructure protection, high visibility patrol and prevention, emergency response with allied agencies 
and units, recovery operation support and outreach to the maritime community. The unit is co-located with the Delaware Information 
and Analysis Center (DIAC) and works regularly with a specially trained intelligence analyst. This allows unit members to tailor pro-
active patrols based on the current threat picture and vulnerability assessments. This “intelligence-led” model allows for more effec-
tive patrol a very large area of responsibility.
The Criminal Intelligence Section was proud of the ability to provide proactive criminal investigations, valuable case support and the 
facilitation of an information sharing environment in 2019. The DIAC will continue to evaluate the standing information needs and 
priority intelligence needs of our stakeholders in Delaware. We will continue to evaluate the threat environment and how it applies to 
Delaware. The DIAC will continue to work toward its core mission of detecting, preventing, investigating and responding to criminal 
and terrorist activity. We will continue to disseminate intelligence and facilitate communications between state, local, federal agencies 
and private sector partners, to help them take action on threats and public safety issues.
The Real Time Crime Center (RTCC) is responsible for developing and maintaining software solutions to support the State Police 
Enhanced Analytical Response (SPEAR) program. This program is an evidence based policing model exhibited after the Stratified 
Policing Model.
In 2019, the RTCC continued the SmartForce software program in support of the SPEAR program. The SmartForce technology is 
an organizational management system tailored for the Stratified Policing Model. SmartForce technology leverages the Microsoft 
SharePoint system to collect and analyze key data sets that are essential to the evaluation of Troop Commanders evidenced base 
operational deployment plans.
The Delaware State Police Critical Incident Stress Management (CISM) Team continues to provide services to law enforcement and 
emergency service personnel for both state and municipal agencies throughout the state Delaware. The team assists officers and other 
emergency service personnel with minimizing the harmful effects of job related stress, traumatic stress and personal stressors. The 
team is dedicated to maintaining strict confidentiality and respects the thoughts and feelings of the individuals involved.
24  Delaware State Police
 Critical Incident Stress Management Team  - Sergeant Francis L. Fuscellaro II
Sgt. Francis L Fuscellaro II and team assistant Sgt. Kelly Wells lead the Delaware State Police Critical Incident Stress Management 
Team. The team presently consists of 16 sworn and 3 civilian members who have received training endorsed by the International 
Critical Incident Stress Foundation.
The year 2019 was an extremely hard one for the Delaware State Police CISM Team, with the passing of their team assistant, John 
Shoemaker. John passed away on April 18,2019 at the age of 59 at Bayhealth Kent Campus surrounded family and friends. John was 
a huge part of the CISM Team and assisted numerous Troopers, Officers and Fire Personnel throughout his time as a CISM member. 
John will be deeply missed.
The Team responded to approximately 75 incidents, which included the unexpected death of their team assistant, John Shoemaker, 
police involved shootings, military re-integration, fatal accidents, CPR on children, as well as other traumatic events for law enforce-
ment and emergency service personnel. The Team has assisted multiple Troopers and Officers with personal issues in which some 
incidents were referred to EAP or the Team’s Mental Health Provider, Dr. Ellen Marshall.
The most significant responses for the Team in 2019 were ones involving death of children. In October Team members assisted 
Troopers and other first responders who were involved with the tragic accident where a vehicle crashed into the C and D Canal. 
Inside of the vehicle were an 18 year old, two 16-year-olds, a 12-year-old, and a 6 year old. All of who died accept a 16 year old 
female.
Dr. Ellen Marshall served as the Head of the Psychology Department for Delaware Technical and Community College, Owens 
Campus, Georgetown DE. She continues to work closely with the Delaware State Police CISM team as well as other Teams in the 
State. She is the Team’s Mental Health Coordinator, where she volunteers her time. She has conducted approximately 70 one-on-one 
CISM sessions not including the responses she does with the Team, making the team’s total number of incidents/responses approxi-
mately 145 for the year 2019.
The Delaware Division of Gaming Enforcement (DGE) falls under the Department of Safety and 
Homeland Security and is comprised of civilian and sworn investigators under the direction of Director 
Gregory D. Nolt.
DGE is responsible for ensuring the operational security and integrity of the Delaware State Video Lottery, 
Sports Lottery, Interactive Fantasy Sports Contests, and Table Game Operations as required by Delaware 
Title 29, Chapter 48. DGE utilizes a three pronged organizational structure which include; Casino Background Investigations, 
Criminal Investigations and Intelligence. These three components, working together, provide a comprehensive approach to ensuring 
the integrity of the gaming industry.
The Casino Background Investigators consist of one supervisor, six background investigators and two administrative assistants. 
The purpose of the background investigations is to ensure that casino employees, companies and vendors meet the requirements of 
Delaware licensing and possess the financial responsibility, honesty and integrity required by a licensee.
The Criminal Investigations and Intelligence model consists of eight Delaware State Troopers and one agent from the Division of 
Alcohol and Tobacco Enforcement. The primary function of criminal investigations is to investigate and prevent gaming crimes, 
promote public safety, gather intelligence information about criminal activity and develop actionable plans to facilitate effective 
and efficient policing activities. There is also one full time Deputy Attorney General assigned to the unit for the administration and 
enforcement of DGE objectives.
In 2019, Delaware Gaming Enforcement detectives investigated a total of 361 complaints with 61 of the complaints being gaming 
related. The investigations conducted by the detectives involved numerous types of offenses including underage gambling, trespass-
ing, theft, forgery, fraud, assault, robbery and money laundering. Many of the investigations involve working in collaboration with 
local, state and federal law enforcement agencies in order to solve the cases and arrest the appropriate individuals.
Individuals that are arrested and convicted of crimes committed in the casinos may be placed on an exclusion list. Individuals placed 
on an exclusion list are not permitted to gamble in any of the three Delaware casinos. If an individual on the exclusion list is caught 
gambling in the casinos, the individual will be arrested and have to forfeit any winnings.
2019 Annual Report  25 Division of Gaming Enforcement  - Lieutenant Thomas Paskevicius

In 2019, DGE continued to conduct Violent Intruder Preparedness and Response (VIPR) training for employees at all casinos. The 
lead topic of the training was VIPR, which consists of a Run, Hide, Fight strategy and discussion of situational awareness. The sec-
ond part of the training was the introduction and hands-on application of tourniquets. The training was conducted in partnership with 
State of Delaware Emergency Medical and Preparedness Section. The purpose of the training was to aid the casinos in the establish -
ment of plans and responses to potential violent incidents.
The primary mission of the Executive Protection Unit is to provide security for the Governor of the state. This security includes, but 
is not limited to, protection against assassination, assault and accidental death or injury. Additionally, the Executive Protection Unit 
is tasked with:
• In-depth knowledge and constant monitoring of the Governor’s schedule.
• Perform advance work at every location that the Governor will be in attendance. This includes interior and exterior floor plans, 
emergency exits, staging locations, employee threats or concerns, knowledge and notification made to the local, state and/or federal 
police jurisdiction where the Governor’s event is being held, location of the closest emergency/Level-1 trauma center, on-site emer -
gency care and primary and secondary routes of all events.
• Investigate threats made against the Governor, First Family, staff and any other dignitary that could be relevant to the safety of the 
First Family.
• Liaison between our law enforcement counterparts (local, state and federal) in order to ensure the safety and efficiency of the 
Governor’s responsibilities and endeavors.
The Executive Protection Unit is staffed by sworn members of the Division with the highest ranking Trooper designated as the 
Officer-in-Charge (OIC) and reporting directly to the special operations Major.
It is the responsibility of EPU to provide executive protection services for all events directly related to the Office of the Governor, as 
well as any personal events that the Governor attends. This protection applies to travel occurring within the continental United States 
and during International travel. The same Executive Protection services that are provided to the Governor shall be extended to the 
First Lady and the immediate family.
EPU is primarily charged with the protection of the Governor and the First Family. However, at the request of the Governor, or if 
deemed necessary by EPU due to a credible threat and/or extenuating circumstances, EPU will extend its protective detail services to 
include the Governor’s staff and Delaware’s Federal Congressional Delegation or other dignitaries.
The Fiscal Control Section’s goal is to provide efficient and professional financial services to the division. To that end, members of 
the section strive to:
1) Pay all bills in a timely manner and in accordance with all laws, rules, regulations and policies
2) Make recommendations to the Administrative Officer – Budget concerning the appropriate internal allocation of funds to the divi-
sion’s cost centers
3) Provide expertise to the Executive Staff for the development of the division’s annual budget
4) Provide the Executive Staff with expertise in the determination of the fiscal impact of various proposals
5) Coordinate the fiscal implementation of those proposals
In conjunction with the Administrative Officer – Budget (Major), the section assists in the overall development, management and 
administration of the division’s budget within the framework of all prevailing state and federal law, as well as divisional rules, reg-
ulations and policies. Fiscal Control ensures compliance with all Generally Accepted Accounting Principles as promulgated by the 
Delaware Department of Finance and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), pre-audits all financial obligations for the divi-
sion, ensures authenticity before processing, and ensures compliance with all purchasing procedures.
26  Delaware State PoliceFiscal Control Section  - Ms. Sandra L. FrazierExecutive Protection Unit  - Sergeant Keith R. Mark
During 2019, members of the section continued to support the Delaware State Police Executive Staff by supplying cost estimates 
associated with the two recruit classes, advising senior management on the budgetary impact of increased overtime usage and the 
monitoring of the division’s finances as they relate to the State’s economic situation. Fiscal Control continues to remain cognizant of 
all federal funding and spending guidelines.
The Delaware State Police Homicide Section is comprised of three distinct and unique units; the Homicide Unit, the Forensic 
Firearms Services Unit and the Crime Lab. These units are staffed by talented civilian and sworn divisional employees with special -
ized training and advanced education allowing them to detect crimes, identify suspects and prosecute the offenders in court.
Established in 1989, the DSP Homicide Unit is comprised of seven sworn members and one civilian administrative assistant. The 
primary responsibilities of the Homicide Unit include the investigation of homicides, suspicious deaths and missing persons in which 
the victim is suspected to be deceased. The Homicide Unit also investigates officer involved uses of deadly force, attempted murders 
and selected assaults. In addition to new investigations, the Homicide Unit is responsible for investigating “cold case” homicides. 
During 2019, the Homicide Unit investigated 23 new cases and 7 cold cases. The unit provided investigative assistance to all DSP 
criminal troops and allied law enforcement agencies in numerous death and missing person investigations to include the Philadelphia 
(PA) Police, Providence (RI) Police Department, Miami/Dade County (FL) Police, and Richmond (V A) Police. Agencies from within 
Delaware included Harrington PD (two Homicide cases) PD, and Selbyville PD (Officer Involved Shooting).
Of the 23 new cases investigated, twelve were homicide investigations and two were attempted homicides. Eight of these cases were 
cleared and additional clearances are forthcoming as investigators continue to piece together evidence. The unit also investigated two 
police officer involved use of force cases, and two death investigations. In addition, twelve cases from previous years were adjudi -
cated in the court system with findings of guilt or guilty pleas during 2019.
This year the Homicide Unit hosted the 24th Annual Homicide Conference in Dover. This annual event is recognized as one of the 
premiere conferences in the nation dealing with the investigation of suspicious deaths. 150 criminal investigators representing 48 
law enforcement agencies from the northeast region attended the conference, which included several nationally recognized speakers. 
Topics included crime scene management, domestic related homicides, cellular phone evidence analysis as well as overviews of sev-
eral nationally known cases.
The Homicide Unit Commander is Captain Peter Sawyer with Sergeant Steve Yeich assigned as the daily supervisor. Sgt. Yeich is 
complimented with Detective Roger Cresto, the Evidence Technician and Detectives Mark Ryde, Jon King, Dan Grassi and Mark 
Csapo. Retired Homicide Unit Sergeant David Weaver rejoined the unit in 2019 as a civilian cold case investigator. Administrative 
Assistant Ashley Torbert rounds out the team and provides invaluable assistance to a cohesive unit that is committed to providing 
justice for our victims and closure for their families.
Within the DSP Homicide Section is the Forensic Firearms Services Unit (FFSU). The FFSU was created in November 2006 to 
assist all law enforcement agencies in Delaware with the investigation of gun related and other violent crimes by examining firearms 
and ballistic related evidence collected during criminal investigations. The FFSU is staffed by Detective Nick Lano as the Brasstrax 
technician and Mr. James Cadigan who is the certified forensic firearms examiner. Contractor Robert Freese, Stephen Deady and 
James Storey also assist in the lab as Forensic Firearms Examiners.
From November 2006 through December 2017, 8,888 firearms related investigations have been submitted to the FFSU for examina -
tion. During 2019, an additional 866 firearms related cases were submitted for evaluation. This included 35 murder investigations, 
555 firearms, 2,768 fired cartridge cases and 555 bullet specimens. The FFSU provided forensic firearms services to 28 Delaware, 
federal and out of state law enforcement agencies. In addition to the submissions received by the FFSU, 313 IBIS/Brasstrax ballistic 
case matches were confirmed by the forensic firearms examiners. The examiners provided expert witness testimony regarding the 
results of the forensic ballistics examination and offered services such as firearm serial number restoration, gunshot residue testing, 
bullet trajectory work and tool mark examinations to Delaware investigative agencies.
Since its inception, the Delaware State Police Crime Lab has provided services for numerous local and municipal police depart -
ments, federal agencies and the Delaware State Police. Under the direction of Mrs. Julie Willey, the Crime Lab is staffed by three 
civilian employees. The lab is comprised of units specializing in blood alcohol analysis, breath alcohol analysis and hairs and fibers 
analysis.
2019 Annual Report  27Homicide Unit  - Captain Peter Sawyer
Crime Lab chemists conduct the alcohol analyses of all DUI/alcohol and DUI/drug cases (except fatal accidents) statewide. In 2019, 
they received 1,677 blood evidence kits for review and analyzed all of those samples for BAC. The DSP Crime Lab is the sole state 
lab responsible for the calibration checks of the Intoxilyzer instruments utilized for breath alcohol analysis as well as the training of 
Intoxilyzer operators. As a result of the statewide services provided by members of the Crime Lab, the staff received 1,703 subpoenas 
to appear in Delaware courts during 2019.
The Crime Lab also manages the DSP photo storage program, which includes responding to requests from attorneys and insurance 
companies for stored photographs. A large project to digitize every DSP evidence photo dating back to the department’s inception is 
underway and will make locating old photos easier and more efficient.
In addition to the above services provided by the Crime Lab, Director Willey also performs calibration checks of the Ionscan instru-
ment maintained by the Delaware National Guard. The Ionscan is used to detect trace amounts of illegal drugs and explosives. 
As cost center manager, Director Willey also manages funds allocated for the purchase of supplies used by the Forensic Firearms 
Services Unit, the Homicide Unit, the Crime Lab and the three statewide DSP evidence detection units and crash reconstruction units. 
Director Willey also serves as the DSP forensic microscopist and conducts hair and fiber analysis upon request.
As we move into 2020, the members of the Delaware State Police Homicide Section remain committed to serving the residents and 
visitors of our state with the highest quality of service possible. Unit members look forward to meeting the new challenges in crime 
fighting through continued and specialized training as well as the utilization of the latest advanced technology in forensics.
During the course of 2019 the Delaware State Police Honor Guard Unit was comprised of 48 active members 
statewide. 
In order to be selected to join the Unit, members must demonstrate exceptional maintenance of their uniforms 
and equipment, strong military bearing and, most importantly, exemplary character. Membership in the Honor 
Guard also requires a commitment to training and a willingness to serve at a moment’s notice to represent the 
Division in honorable fashion. All Unit members are cross-trained to perform as members of color guards, to serve as pallbearers and 
as casket watch, to conduct flag folds and to conduct rifle volleys.
During the course of 2019 the Unit conducted six in-service training sessions and continued its training partnership with allied agen-
cies by opening our training sessions to Honor Guard members from a host of Delaware and Pennsylvania police departments. In 
addition, the Unit hosted the 2019 Sgt. Rodney H. Bond #448 Memorial Honor Guard Conference in September which afforded 61 
ceremonial operators from 24 agencies and 17 States an intense week-long training related to ceremonial functions.
Throughout 2019, Honor Guard members participated in 66 total events. Unit members were humbled to play a role in the funeral 
services for Zachery Fanning, the son of Master Corporal Price Fanning as well as John Shoemaker who served for years as a valued 
member of the DSP Family in his role at KENTCOM.
The Delaware State Police Human Resources Unit provides a full array of critical services to 729 Troopers, 238 civilian employees 
and 45 casual seasonal (part-time) employees. These services include all on-boarding activities with recruiting, application pro-
cessing, testing, pre-employment background investigations including polygraph examinations, and new employee orientation. In 
addition, the Human Resources Unit is responsible for benefits and payroll, extra duty monitoring and compensation, worker’s com-
pensation, Early Warning System compliance and review, employee assistance, EEOC compliance, labor relations, internal transfer 
and competitive promotion processes, career development, wellness programs, fitness and weight monitoring and separation and 
retirement.
The Human Resources Unit commitment to excellence is anchored by a small team of dedicated civilian employees providing daily 
administrative functions and support for 1,012 employees. In addition, the Human Resources unit is comprised of a Recruiting 
28  Delaware State Police
Honor Guard Unit  - Captain J. Sapp
Human Resources Office  - Captain Jon Wood
& Application Unit, Polygraph Unit and Background Investigative Unit (BGI). The team is currently led by Captain Jon Wood 
(Director), Lieutenant Andrea Boone (Assistant Director), Administrative/Legal Services Manager Ms. Monica Holmes, Payroll/
Benefits/EEO Manager Ms. Rhonda Davis and Polygraph Unit Sergeant Kristin Smith, who is also responsible for the Application/
Recruiting/BGI supervision. In early 2019, Ms. Holmes and Ms. Davis were integrated into the Department of Human Resources in 
compliance with legislation that centralized all state agency human resources.
The Background Investigative Unit (BGI) is comprised of up to nine casual/season investigators that are retired Delaware State 
Troopers. The BGI Unit is responsible for conducting comprehensive in-depth investigations on all potential employees of the 
Division. At peak times in the application process, Troopers from around the state are temporarily transferred to HR to conduct  
background investigations on recruit troopers. In 2019, 154 (79 sworn, 55 civilian) pre-employment background investigations were 
completed that underwent multiple levels of review for an impartial decision on employment.
The Polygraph Unit Detectives are all nationally certified examiners and, while assigned to Human Resources, are housed within 
the criminal investigative facilities across the State. This allows the polygraph examiners to assist the CI units as needed with poly-
graph exams or assist other detectives. The Polygraph Unit is comprised of one sergeant, two full time examiners and two part time 
examiners. In addition, one former member of the unit, who was promoted and transferred, continues to maintain her certification by 
assisting with examinations on a part time basis. During 2019, 273 applicant polygraph examinations were conducted and 11 crimi -
nal polygraphs were conducted.
The Human Resources Unit is responsible for managing the internal transfer screening process. When a special unit position for a 
Trooper becomes vacant, and when authorized by the Colonel, notice is sent announcing the opening. Qualified Troopers submit the 
required paperwork to Human Resources for screening. Lt. Boone, assisted by Ms. Sara Nash, facilitate a diverse and demograph-
ically applicable review panel to provide advisement to the Executive Staff regarding each candidate. This panel, monitored by a 
Human Resources Member, reviews the submitted paperwork, endorsements, and evaluations to make a determination if the candi -
date meets the prerequisites. In some circumstances, oral boards are also utilized to evaluate the candidate. In 2019, 39 review panels 
were conducted to fill operational needs.
DSP Recruiters, with the aid and support of part-time Trooper Recruiters, attended 97 career fairs or recruiting events and facilitated 
numerous “How to Succeed” seminars, facilitated “mock” PT tests for recruit trooper applicants, mentored recruits in training, con-
ducted oral board interviews and screened applicants at the PT Tests. As part of our outreach and recruiting efforts, multiple students 
were selected for internships, working at several Patrol troops, Headquarters and SBI.
In March 2019, the 92ndB DSP Recruit Class began with the selection of 5 Recruit Troopers. In September 2019, the 93rd DSP 
Recruit Class began with the selection of 30 Recruit Troopers, restoring the Division to near its full complement of authorized posi-
tions. During 2019, administrators processed 1,182 applications for the position of Trooper.
In 2019, Human Resources processed over 634 applications to hire 37 full-time or casual seasonal civilian employees into var -
ious roles replacing those who separated or retired from the Division. The 9-1-1 Communication Centers and State Bureau of 
Identification continues to see the highest turnover of employees keeping the Unit busy with testing, backgrounds and interviews. 
In 2019, the Delaware State Police continued to progress with JobAps, an on-line application process. The JobAps program allows 
the Human Resources Unit to more effectively manage the labor intensive application process while providing the applicants with a 
user friendly environment to apply for positions within the State Police. Several crucial upgrades were purchased to enhance the pro-
gram’s usefulness specific to the needs of DSP.
The Human Resources Unit extends a sincere thank you to the dozens of Delaware State Police employees and retirees, who contin -
ue to actively recruit, test, investigate and hire the future generation of troopers.
The Information Technology Section is comprised of 4 Teams – End User Services, Network Operations, Applications Support/
Programming and Mobile Technologies.
IT is comprised of 13 full-time employees, 8 casual-seasonal employees and 1 contracted hire.
IT is organized into 2 areas of expertise – End User Services and Infrastructure Services. End User Services consists of the Client 
Services Team (which includes Help Desk and Digital Evidence Support) and the Mobile Tech team and is managed by Marissa 
2019 Annual Report  29Information Technology Section  - Jim Cashnelli
Warren. Infrastructure Services consists of the Network Operations Team and Applications Support Team and is managed by Ken 
Allen. Jim Cashnelli oversees the entire IT section, serving as the IT Director for DSP.
In 2019, IT completed 13 projects, closed out 3,757 support tickets and processed 6,002 digital evidence requests.
IT has a number of key initiatives for 2020. These include Desktop Virtualization, migration to more vendor supported applications 
rather than developing applications in house, implementation of Quickbooks for cost center management, assisting with the 2020 
fleet roll-out, desktop hardware refreshes and working with DTI on deploying Office 365. In addition, IT is currently working with 
DTI on the Governor’s IT Consolidation initiative.
VDI (which stands for Virtual Desktop Interface) will be an important initiative for IT in 2020. VDI allows us to turn a physical 
desktop into software that looks, acts and feels like a regular Windows PC but can be run from any device – iPad, Android Tablet, 
Mobile Phone, low cost PC, etc. This will allow us to centralize desktop deployments, simplify and streamline support, and improve 
the over all end user desktop experience.
Additionally, the decision to move from in house created applications to vendor supported applications was driven by the need to 
provide a faster turn around for application requests while recognizing that these applications still need to be supported long after 
the programmer who created them has moved on to other opportunities. By moving to vendor supported applications, it serves as a 
force multiplier for IT. IT can rely on these vendors to provide work effort to support the applications while freeing up other DSP IT 
resources to work on other project tasks and initiatives.
Technology continues to be more and more complex and new technologies allow for new ways to assist law enforcement in perform-
ing their jobs safely and professionally. As these technologies mature and become available for everyday use IT will be tasked with 
integrating them into effective solutions that will enhance the Division’s ability to keep Delaware’s population and our Troopers safe.  
This will occur thanks in no small part to the men and women of DSP IT who regularly go above and beyond to make sure all of the 
Division’s IT needs are met as quickly and seamlessly as possible allowing the Division to focus on its primary responsibility of Law 
Enforcement. 
The Deputy Attorney General assigned to the Division provides advise to the Division on all civil matters. The Deputy’s functions 
including assisting Internal Affairs in prosecuting disciplinary matters before Trial Boards and assisting, where needed, with its inves-
tigations and case reviews. The Deputy also represents Internal Affairs in any disciplinary appeals to the Secretary.
The Deputy advises Executive Staff on legislative and contract issues, the Freedom of Information Act requests and legislation. The 
Deputy advises Human Resource on a variety of federal and state matters, including issues arising under the Fair Labor Standards 
Act, Family Medical Leave Act, Uniformed Services Employment and Re-Employment Rights Act, Americans with Disabilities Act 
and federal and state anti-discrimination laws. The Deputy assists Human Resources in responding to charges of discrimination filed 
with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission and Delaware Department of Labor. The Deputy advises the State Bureau 
of Identification on Sex Offender Registry, Firearms Transaction Approval Program, expungement and civil subpoena issues. The 
Deputy provides Crisis Intervention Training, in-house training and presents at the Division Training Academy.  The Deputy provides 
advise to the Professional Licensing Unit on professional regulation issues. The Deputy assists with litigation against the Division.
The Division Deputy serves as counsel to the Council on Police Training, the Special Law Enforcement Assistance Fund, the Board 
of Examiners of Constables, the Board of Examiners of Private Investigators and Private Security Agencies and Bail Enforcement 
Agents.
The purpose of the Delaware State Police Legislative Liaison Office is to serve as a liaison between the Delaware Department of 
Safety and Homeland Security and Delaware’s elected officials of the legislature and executives branches. There are twelve (12) 
divisions within the DSHS which include the Delaware Developmental Disabilities Council, the State Council for Persons with 
30  Delaware State PoliceLegal Section  - Joseph Handlon, Deputy Attorney General
Legislative Liaison  - Sergeant Darren J. Lester
Disabilities, the Division of Gaming Enforcement, the Delaware Emergency Management Agency, the Office of Highway Safety, 
the Delaware Bureau of Alcohol and Tobacco Enforcement, the Office of Alcoholic Beverage Control Commissioner, the Division 
of Communications, the Capitol Police Department, Division of Forensic Science, the Office of the Secretary and the Delaware 
State Police. The Legislative Liaison Office helps prepare legislation and answers questions the Governor’s Office, members of the 
General Assembly and representatives from other Delaware departments may have in regard to legislation which impacts any of the 
Department’s divisions. The Legislative Liaison Office also handles constituent relation questions brought to it by legislators.
During the most recent legislative session, the 150th General Assembly, 1st Session, the Division was fortunate to have the support 
of the Governor and legislators which resulted in the passage of the following bills that were of significant benefit to the Division.
HB #30 – Bill seeks to prohibit the use of unmanned aircraft systems (drones) to introduce contraband into detention facilities. This 
bill makes it a class F felony to deliver or attempt to deliver contraband by use of drone.
HB #113 – Bill clarifies that Delaware Law Enforcement may enter into agreements to provide mutual assistance to other jurisdic -
tions.
SB #54 – Bill codifies Delaware’s compatibility with certain sections of the Federal Code related to weight of vehicles and loads and 
commercial vehicle safety. Delaware enforces violations contained in the Code of Federal Regulations Parts 374, 385 and 386 and 
wishes to formally adopt those parts and any subsequent amendments thereto.
SB #97 - This Act ratifies the National Crime Prevention and Privacy Compact, 34 U.S.C. §40316 (formerly cited as 42 U.S.C. § 
14616), a requirement that allows Delaware to join the Compact as a Party State. The Compact serves as the infrastructure by which 
states can exchange criminal records for noncriminal justice purposes according to the laws of the requesting state and provide reci -
procity among the states to share records without charging each other for the information.
SB #147 - Act allows the Department of Safety and Homeland Security to share accident reports and the data in the reports with the 
Department of Transportation. This Act also allows the Department of Transportation to provide certain de-identified data from acci -
dent reports to limited requestors.
The citizens of Delaware hold the Delaware State Police in high regard. Members of the Delaware State Police must set the tone 
for all law enforcement agencies in our state. The public expects members of our agency to act with honor, integrity, reliability and 
trustworthiness. To accomplish and maintain the esteem placed upon its members, Delaware State Troopers must acknowledge, 
uphold and revere the core values of the Delaware State Police: Honor, Integrity, Courage, Loyalty, Attitude, Discipline and Service.
The citizens we serve have an expectation that those who are vested with the responsibility of enforcing the laws of this state, as 
well as civilian employees, will hold fast to the standards of professional and individual conduct to preserve the respect, confidence 
and cooperation of society.
The public image of the Delaware State Police is, to a large degree, determined by the way the Office of Professional Responsibility 
responds to allegations of misconduct of its employees. The Office of Professional Responsibility is an essential function designed 
to maintain professional conduct, integrity and discipline of each employee. The office is responsible for investigating allegations of 
misconduct and conducting investigations to ensure compliance with Divisional rules and regulations and the Code of Ethics. The 
Office of Professional Responsibility is readily accessible to citizens via telephone, letter, Internet or in person. In 2019, Captain 
Matthew Cox, Lieutenant Thomas Paskevicius, Lieutenant David Hake, Sergeant Dannielle Rementer and Ms. Debra Hughes were 
assigned to the office. In October, Captain Sean Duffy and Lieutenant Phil Dzielak were transferred into the unit when Captain Cox 
was promoted to Major and Lieutenant Paskevicius transferred to the Division of Gaming Enforcement.
In addition to its primary duties, the Office of Professional Responsibility maintains an active role in training supervisors and 
recruits. Supervisors are instructed on the proper handling of citizen complaints and investigative protocol in accordance with the 
Law Enforcement Officer’s Bill of Rights. Recruits are also acquainted with the function of the unit, including an overview of rules, 
regulations and job performance standards.
2019 Annual Report  31Office of Professional Responsibility  - Captain Sean Duffy
The DSP Pipes and Drums can claim 20 consistently performing members at the conclusion of the year. The 
band is continues to strive to grow its’ ranks after falling from a peak membership of 27 performers. Currently, 
the band has two troopers who are attending bagpipe lessons.
The band performed 89 times in 2019, an increase of 22 over 2018. The events consisted of funerals, memorial 
ceremonies, Special Olympics events and various community events and ceremonies. The band is adminis -
tered by Maj. Matthew Cox. Mr. Robert Galloway continued to be the volunteer pipe instructor and our Pipe 
Major, as he has been since the band’s inception in December of 2001. The drum corps is currently instructed by volunteer Mr. John 
McKinnon, who has coached the drum corps for many years.
The band continued its support of our nation’s military with performances in support of several community military recognition 
events. Of particular note was the opportunity to perform at two separate Vietnam War veteran memorial events involving mobile 
Vietnam War memorials. One memorial visited Lewes, and the other was displayed at the Ocean View V .F.W. post. In August we 
were honored to participate in the Delaware Air National Guard Battalion Departure Ceremony held at the Delaware State University 
football stadium.
The band continues to honor requests for playing at opening ceremonies of Divisional events. The band also makes appearances at 
community events that involve the Delaware State Police. Notable events during 2019 included: the Wilmington St. Patrick’s Day 
Parade, a May performance at the Point-to-Point Steeplechase races on the Winterthur Museum grounds and the Delaware Special 
Olympics Opening Ceremonies in June.
The Planning and Special Events Section reports directly to the Deputy Superintendent and provides support to the executive staff.  
The section is staffed by Captain Mike Reader and Sergeant Patrick Wenk.
The Planning and Special Events Section continued to play an important role in the overall operation of the division. Members of the 
section facilitated events and meetings such as the Chaplain’s Memorial, the Memorial Service and the “Employees of the Year” cer -
emony. These events honor those who serve the citizens of the State of Delaware in an exemplary fashion and those who made the 
ultimate sacrifice in service to the State of Delaware. The section also facilitated the Troopers’ and Civilian Forums. These forums 
allowed the executive staff to meet with troopers and civilians to gain valuable input into the operation and future direction of the 
division.
Members of the section continued to serve on a variety of councils and committees. The Planning and Special Events Section 
responded to surveys from other law enforcement agencies, conducted research in the areas of proposed laws, updated or assisted in 
creating new policy, studied staff allocation and conducted new building analysis.
The members of the Planning and Special Events Section played an important role in the success of the Delaware State Police in 
2019 and look forward to the challenges that will be presented in 2020.
Community Outreach
The Delaware State Police believes building partnerships and relationships with the commercial, residential and faith based commu -
nities across Delaware will enhance our ability to be a highly effective law enforcement agency. In an effort to achieve this,  
DSP established the Community Outreach Unit (COU) in 2015. The COU’s principal responsibilities are maintaining and build-
ing partnerships and relationships across Delaware and maintaining a presence in our communities’ schools, places of worship and 
neighborhood associations.
In January, the COU organized the fourth DSP Honorary Commanders Program which partners Troop Commanders with some of 
Delaware’s distinguished community, civic and political leaders. The program encourages an exchange of ideas, experiences and 
friendships between key leaders of the surrounding communities and the troop’s territory. Another COU accomplishment was the 
32  Delaware State PolicePlanning and Research Section  - Captain Mike ReaderPipes & Drums  - Captain Matthew Cox

development of the DSP Community Outreach Focus Groups. This program is comprised of COU members, citizens and community 
leaders. The groups meet quarterly in each county to measure the effectiveness of existing community-based programs and explore 
new opportunities as it relates to community outreach.
In 2019 the COU continued its partnership with the U.S. Attorney’s Office by being an active member of the Violence Reduction 
Network (VRN) initiative in the City of Wilmington. The VRN is a comprehensive program created by the U.S. Department of 
Justice (DOJ), Office of Justice Programs, and the Bureau of Justice Assistance to leverage existing DOJ resources to deliver strate -
gic, intensive training and technical assistance in an “all-hands” approach to reduce violence in some of the country’s most violent 
cities. The COU’s role in the VRN has been focused on outreach, education and prevention programs targeting juveniles within the 
City of Wilmington. Presentations have taken place in elementary, middle and high schools within the city and New Castle County 
schools with inner-city feeder patterns. In addition to the school venues, presentations have also taken place at Hicks-Anderson 
Community Center, the Sihk Center of Delaware and the Tarbiyah Muslim School. Topics of discussion include strengthening  
community-police relations, mock crime reporting, drug and alcohol awareness, good decision making and conflict resolution. In all, 
thirty-seven visits were made at these venues with multiple presentations given on each visit.
Sergeant Kristin Willard supervises the unit and is supported by COU officers Cpl/2 Robert Colmery, Cpl/3 Rickey Hargis, Cpl/3 
Lewis Briggs and Cpl/2 Heather Imhof. In 2020 the COU will remain committed to reaching out to communities in our jurisdiction 
in an open and honest fashion to build relationships and help to create safer communities.
Staff Inspections and Accreditation
The Staff Inspections and Accreditation Office’s primary responsibility is to assure that the division’s policies and procedures comply 
with the 484 standards established by the Commission on Accreditation for Law Enforcement Agencies (CALEA). Additionally, this 
unit is responsible for maintaining, reviewing, revising/updating and distributing all divisional policies and standard operating proce-
dures.
CALEA was formed to establish a body of standards designed to promote “best practices” in policing. In addition, the commission 
was formed to develop an accreditation process that provides agencies an opportunity to voluntarily demonstrate that they meet an 
established set of professional standards.
In 1988, the Delaware State Police became the first department in Delaware to attain accreditation by CALEA. This is an on-going 
commitment consisting of a self-assessment, mock assessment and a comprehensive on-site inspection by CALEA assessors every 
four years. During the on-site inspection by the assessors, the division must demonstrate compliance with all of the standards, at 
every facility, and be able to prove we have complied with all standards during the previous three years. Staffed by Sergeant William 
Nottingham and Cpl/3 Patty Sennet-Wysock, the office accomplishes this task by maintaining files and proof for each standard, con-
tinuously updating written directives, reviewing all new policies for compliance and conducting troop, vehicle and evidence storage 
locker inspections.
The Delaware State Police Public Information Office (PIO) continues the proud tradition of supplying the media and the public with 
timely, accurate and useful information on the day to day operations of the Division. The Delaware State Police Public Information 
Office operates on a 24 hour basis and on-call numbers are provided to Divisional personnel and members of the media for immedi -
ate contact or response to critical incidents if requested.
Sergeant Richard D. Bratz is the Director of the Public Information Office and is responsible for overseeing the  daily operations and 
administrative duties that are associated with the office. Along with these administrative duties, he serves as a coordinator for the 
Delaware Amber Alert Program and coordinates efforts to send the Community Outreach message to all traditional and social media 
outlets. He also coordinates the Citizen’s Police Academy in all three counties which is offered semiannually.
Master Corporal Michael Austin serves as the primary New Castle County Public Information Officer and Master Corporal Melissa 
Jaffe serves as the primary Kent and Sussex County Public Information Officer. In addition to their daily responsibilities as a PIO, 
they are also involved in numerous community service presentations throughout the State, which include but are not limited to: 
(Honorary Commander Induction Ceremony, Memorial Services, Sign and Building Dedication Ceremonies, Promotion Ceremonies, 
Community Outreach Ceremonies, Wreath-Laying Ceremony, Trooper Youth Week Graduation and Employee of the Year Ceremony 
to name a few).
2019 Annual Report  33Public Information Office  - Sergeant Richard D. Bratz
The Public Information Office created and disseminated over (1,300) News Releases on DSPnewsroom.com and over 1,500 
Facebook posts. The Delaware State Police Twitter.com and Nextdoor.com are additional websites that were effectively used to 
enhance our public safety message.
As public representatives of the Delaware State Police, the Public Information Office strives to represent Troopers of the Division 
with excellence and upholds the pride and tradition that has been with the Delaware State Police since its inception in 1923.
The primary goal of the Purchasing and Supply/ Graphic Section is to provide service, supplies and equipment to all DSP employees 
and sections with professionalism, efficiency and accuracy. This section utilizes all available State & Federal resources to supply 
division members with what is necessary to conduct day to day business. The section is staffed with four civilians: Kimberly Cuffee- 
Purchasing Administrator, Deborah Dennis- Purchasing Services Coordinator, George Blanchfield- Supply Technician and Suzanne 
Webster- Graphics Artist. With only having four employees, this section is able to streamline operations and cross train to meet the 
growing needs and demands of the Division’s 950 + employees.
The section’s FY’19 combined budget purchased supplies and equipment for patrol and administrative personnel as well as cov-
ered contractual needs during the fiscal year. On the Purchasing and Supply side of the section, some of the responsibilities include 
approving purchases to ensure they meet the state purchasing laws, contracting, inventory control, ordering necessary supply items; 
to include patrol related gear, and asset management for the division. In addition, this section oversees the division issued purchasing 
cards, reconciling /maintaining budget information and the distribution of supplies to the various troops and sections. The Purchasing 
and Supply/ Graphics Section are also instrumental in supplying the needs of the Academy Recruit classes. The responsibilities of the 
Graphic Section consist of providing and designing printed material, maintaining the Delaware State Police website, identification 
photos/IDs, official portraits and other related tasks. Merging the Purchasing and Supply and the Graphics Sections together allows 
continued access to printing supplies and equipment for a faster turnaround of printed materials.
Municipal departments and state agencies throughout the state utilize the division’s buying power by obtaining various forms and 
publications from this section. Having the Purchasing and Supply/ Graphic Section as the central ordering location allows the entire 
state to save money and ensure all law enforcement agencies are using the same reporting forms. The section continues to be fiscally 
mindful by periodically performing cost analysis on stock items, conducting cost estimates, inventory audits and updating the on-line 
inventory tracking system. By doing so, this ensures the allocated funds are utilized in the best possible manner and equipment is 
inventoried.
The Delaware State Police Special Operation Section is comprised of five specialized units, which are uti-
lized to assist in accomplishing the goals and objectives of the Division. This section includes the Conflict 
Management Team, Explosive Ordnance Disposal Team, Mounted Patrol Unit, SCUBA, Tactical Control Unit 
and the Special Operations Response Team. These units receive monthly training and are proficient and profes-
sional in handling operational needs when called upon by the State.
Conflict Management Team (CMT)
OIC LT Mary McGuire 
The Delaware State Police Conflict Management Team is a part time unit composed of 16 dedicated troopers specially trained in hos-
tage negotiations, kidnap mediation and suicide prevention. Through the application of crisis intervention skills, team members assist 
subjects in crisis to defuse their emotions, lowering the potential for violence. It is the primary goal of the Conflict Management 
Team to resolve these situations without injury or loss of life. The foundation of negotiations relies on the proficiency of active lis-
tening skills used to establish a rapport with the subject in crisis and ultimately affect change in a positive manner.
34  Delaware State PolicePurchasing and Supply Section/Graphics Office  - Ms. Kimberly Cuffee
Special Operations Section  - Lieutenant Michael Nelson

Monthly training used to sharpen negotiation skills is enhanced through the cooperative efforts of its own members as well as our 
partners from allied agencies. In recent years, the Delaware State Police Conflict Management Team has enriched relationships with 
the Department of Corrections, New Castle County and other agencies, to ensure a contingency of competent, well trained negotia -
tors throughout the state. Constant review and analysis of incidents involving persons in crisis is conducted to identify potential areas 
of training. Currently the Conflict Management Team has several members who have also received training in Crisis Intervention and 
Veterans Response Training. This training assists in diversifying our personnel in their negotiations. The team, with the assistance 
of New Castle County Police Department Negotiators hosted a five day basic hostage negotiations course open to all state agencies. 
A 16 hour course is also instructed bi-annually for 911 dispatchers focusing on emergency operators communications during critical 
incidents.
In 2019, members of the Conflict Management Team maintained availability on a 24 hour basis and were utilized on 3 incidents 
involving subjects experiencing mental health disorders. In conjunction with members of the special operations unit, a successful 
outcome was rendered in each incident. In addition to team call-outs, various team members provided specific direction during patrol 
responses to persons in crisis, eliminating the need for full scale responses. With the mental health concerns facing the nation, the 
Delaware State Police Conflict Management Team is dedicated to developing knowledge and resources to mitigate situations of per -
sons in crisis.
Explosive Ordnance Disposal Team (EOD)
NCOIC Sgt. Chris Ennis
The Delaware State Police Explosive Ordnance Disposal (EOD) Team is the longest serving bomb squad 
in the State of Delaware and the only unit responsible for all hazardous devices calls outside the City of 
Wilmington and incorporated areas of New Castle County. Its thirteen bomb technicians are strategically 
based throughout the state to cover the 1,954 square miles within our borders 24 hours a day, every day. With Delaware being the 
6th most densely populated state in the nation and the base of over 50 percent of all U.S. publicly traded corporations, maintaining a 
strategic response plan is crucial. In calendar year 2019 the DSP-EOD team was called to service a staggering 151 times. This tempo 
continues to rival most full time bomb squads in major metropolitan areas.
In 2019, the team took on two new members in preparation of replacing the teams’ two retiring technicians and keeping them at the 
FBI approved staffing limit of eleven certified technicians. Since 9/11, the mission for the public safety bomb technician has evolved 
immensely. The sophisticated equipment and special skills that the team possesses has applications well beyond the traditional bomb 
disposal role. Whether it’s using our sophisticated equipment to assist with drug and weapons investigations, providing an explosive 
entry in a tactical operation, or providing two way communication and video surveillance during suicidal subject or hostage /barri-
caded incidents.
Mounted Patrol Unit
NCOIC Sergeant Alison Meadows
The Delaware State Police Mounted Patrol Unit (DSP MPU) is a division of the Delaware State Police Special 
Operations Unit. This year the unit’s role further expanded its operational capacity under the leadership of 
Lieutenant Michael Nelson. In 2019 the MPU received over 140 requests for service throughout Delaware in areas 
of community outreach, crowd control at specialized events and conducting state-wide daily patrols in our com-
munities, schools and business districts.
The MPU’s mission is to augment and enhance the traditional function of the Delaware State Police during public events and spe-
cialized patrol activities, as well as, pay formal respect to fallen comrades. Participation in the MPU is a collateral assignment to the 
Troopers’ regular duty. The unit currently consists of seven Draft horses, twelve field riders and one full time Trooper. The MPU 
specifically uses Draft horses, averaging between five and seventeen years old. Each horse weigh between 1,800 – 2,200 pounds and 
range in height from 17.0 hands tall (5’8” at the shoulder) to 18.3 hands tall (6’3” at the shoulder.) The MPU’s nonprofit organization 
“Delaware State Police Mounted Patrol Unit, Inc.” raised funds throughout the year to help defray the costs of equipment and health 
care for the horses.
The MPU looks forward to 2020 and furthering its’ focus on community outreach efforts with the citizens and business owners 
throughout Delaware. The MPU is honored to augment and enhance the traditional function of the Delaware State Police during 
public events and specialized patrol activities in this unique capacity. The MPU will continue to provide professional, competent and 
compassionate law enforcement services for the citizens and visitors of Delaware.
2019 Annual Report  35

SCUBA
NCOIC Master Corporal Brian Greene
The Delaware State Police Scuba Unit currently consists of 12 Troopers throughout the state. The unit’s primary responsibility is to 
support the Delaware State Police with search and recovery missions involving aquatic environments. Each member of the unit is a 
graduate of the United States Naval Diving and Salvage Training Center in Panama City Beach, Florida. The Scuba Unit had a total 
of 31 official call-outs during 2019. Some of the highlights of 2019 included safe recoveries for multiple Troops in both the Southern 
and Northern parts of the state as well as multiple vehicle recoveries ranging from automobile accidents to stolen vehicle recoveries. 
Dive team members were also involved in multiple body recoveries throughout the state.
The Scuba Unit continues to train and utilize the newest equipment and techniques in performing their duties. Each fall, the unit con-
ducts deep water diving in Alexandria Bay, New York with the New York State Police. Members work alongside New York Troopers 
as well as Troopers from surrounding states (Rhode Island, Maine, Vermont, Maryland, New Jersey) taking part in deep-water body 
and vehicle recovery. Unit members also attended the New York State Police Ice Diving Certification course in Albany New York.  
Unit members conducted 5 days of under ice diving to become familiar with the dangers and challenges of ice diving. Members also 
performed above ice rescue operations and cold-water survival.
The unit continues to provide services to both the citizens of the State Of Delaware as well as fellow law enforcement agencies. 
The Scuba Unit continues to provide water survival classes to both State Police Recruits as well as local municipal agencies in the 
State Police Academy. The unit also supports the State Police S.O.R.T Team in both their initial testing as well as their preparation 
course. In the summer of 2019, the Delaware State Police Scuba Unit concluded its nearly 3 year program with the University of 
Delaware Marine Studies Program. Scuba Unit members placed inert ordinances on the bay floor for research into their movement 
in tidal waters. The Scuba unit then recovered these projects from the bay floor and turned them over to researchers for information 
gathering. The Scuba Unit also continues to provide rescue swimmers for the Lewes Polar Bear Plunge, which raises funds for the 
Delaware Special Olympics.
The Scuba Unit looks forward to the challenges ahead in 2020 and will continue to train and evolve in the field of diving and recov-
ery. Scuba team members are committed to their practice and remain confident in their abilities to respond and successfully complete 
any and all missions.
Special Operations Response Team (S.O.R.T.)
NCOIC Sergeant Kevin Perna
The Special Operations Response Team (S.O.R.T.) provides the division with a team of highly skilled tactical 
operators, whose role is to respond to, but not limited to: hostage incidents, armed barricade incidents, high 
risk warrant service, high risk tactical vehicle stops, dignitary protection, surveillance assistance and any crisis 
situation deemed appropriate by the executive staff. During 2019, the team responded to 131 calls for service. 
Through professionalism, dedication, intense training and state of the art equipment, the Special Operation Response Team was able 
to conduct these operations successfully and safely. Training continues to be the main contributing factor for success as team mem -
bers attended several training events to sharpen their skills. As a part time team, members continue to perform in an exemplary man-
ner both in the performance of their primary duties within the division and team assignments within S.O.R.T.
The majority of the team deployments involved high-risk warrant executions and tactical vehicle stops for the Special Investigations 
Unit/Drug Units. The team continues to work closely with Special Investigation Units and troop commanders providing tactical sup-
port, executing search warrants, apprehending violent suspects and conducting high-risk tactical vehicle stops. Additionally,  
sniper-observers provided surveillance support to both the Special Investigations Units and Criminal Units statewide. Using state of 
the art optics and night vision equipment, sniper-observers continue to be a valuable intelligence gathering and surveillance tool.
The team conducts monthly training in the areas of hostage rescue, controlled entry techniques, covert/stealth clearing, weapons 
training and scenario based events. During 2019, the team focused on firearm proficiency with an emphasis on advanced tactics, 
live fire threat analysis/engagement, dynamic/stealth clearing techniques and close quarter combat techniques to combat the terrorist 
threat. The entry teams currently train two consecutive days a month with a three-day consecutive training event every quarter for a 
total of 224 training hours annually. The third day of quarterly training consists of explosive breaching training which is provided by 
the DSP Explosive Ordnance Disposal Team. EOD currently has four team members certified. Both units are mission capable in this 
arena. The sniper-observers train three consecutive days monthly for a total of 288 hours annually. The entry teams and sniper teams 
train as a full team two days during monthly training.
In June 2019, the Delaware State Police created a full-time Special Operations Response Team. This full-time team began with a 
total of 5 operators and one supervisor, with the intent to grow to 10 operators. This team of 6 is a subset of the overall SORT team.  
36  Delaware State Police

However, the full-time team element is able to make immediate responses to critical incidents and establish containment and control 
while the part-time team members make their response. The full-time team members meet with investigators throughout the state 
to provide guidance and assistance on the front-end of investigations that might involve the SORT team. They are also tasked with 
building training curriculums, not only for the entire SORT team, but the division as well. They are heavily involved with the divi-
sional in-service training, as well as academy recruit training.
Captain Benjamin Parsons serves as the Director of the State Bureau of Identification (SBI), while Lisa Seymour serves as Assistant 
Director. Lieutenant Charles Sawchenko serves as Officer in Charge of the Professional Licensing Section and Sex Offender 
Apprehension and Registration Unit.
SBI provides the state with a central repository for the collection and accurate organization of criminal arrest records, crime reports 
and missing person reports among other duties. Director Parsons and Assistant Director Seymour, along with seven troopers, four 
sex offender agents and a civilian staff consisting of fifty-four people work in the following separate, but interrelated sections: 
Expungement, Criminal History, Fingerprint Identification, Front Desk, Professional Licensing, Quality Control and Sex Offender 
Apprehension and Registration (SOAR).
Expungement Section is the starting point for all adult expungement and pardon requests. Personnel in this section report directly 
to Lieutenant Sawchenko. The review of expungement requests determine if they can be completed at SBI, or referred to the appro-
priate court for further consideration. In 2019, the Expungement Section processed 2,260 expungement orders; 1,919 expungement 
background checks; 403 pardon orders; 464 pardon applications; 18 commutation orders and 681 truancy orders.
Mr. Doug Hegman supervises the Criminal History Section, which is responsible for the research and completion of criminal history 
background checks for employment and other purposes. The Criminal History Section consists of ten employees. This section pro-
cessed 81,913 criminal history requests in 2019.
Mr. Anthony DiNardo supervises the Fingerprint Identification Section, which is responsible for maintenance and oversight of the 
Automated Fingerprint Identification System (AFIS) and Biometrics for all of Delaware’s law enforcement. The section is also 
responsible for maintaining fingerprint records on arrested criminals and applicants whose intended employment requires criminal 
history checks. Comprised of six employees, this work group processed 77,113 ten-print cards and conducted comparisons on 4,113 
criminal summons in 2019. 1,440 recovered latent prints were analyzed resulting in 835 positive hits; 1,755 new latent prints were 
entered into AFIS. Additionally, 655 unsolved latent print cases were resolved in 2019 utilizing advanced fingerprint analysis algo-
rithms. 835 cases involving photo-facial analysis were evaluated in 2019 resulting in 127 close identification matches.
Mrs. Mindie Pleasanton supervises Front Desk Operations at all SBI locations. Thirteen civilian employees provided fingerprinting 
services to over 67,975 customers requesting criminal history background documentation for a variety of professions and expunge-
ment requests in 2019.
Sergeant Dana Berry supervises the Professional Licensing Section. Employees assigned to this section are responsible for the licens -
ing and monitoring of private security agencies and their employees, private investigative agencies and their employees, security sys-
tem and protective services agencies and their employees, non-state constables, bail enforcement agents, pawn brokers, scrap metal 
processors and second hand dealers. The section monitored 671 companies and over 8,068 licensed employees in 2019. Professional 
Licensing is also required to monitor the Regional Automated Property Information Database (RAPID) and for credentialing 302 HR 
218 Law Enforcement Officers Safety Act permit holders.
Ms. Mary Sheppard supervises the Quality Control Section consisting of seven employees responsible for the quality control review 
of crime reports for the vast majority of all Delaware law enforcement agencies. The purpose of review is to ensure proper coding for 
reporting purpose to the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Once this section has completed their examination, incidents are officially 
counted as a criminal occurrence for statistical and crime tracking purposes. 72,982 crime reports were reviewed and approved by 
this section in 2019.
Sergeant Bruce Harris supervises the Sex Offender Apprehension and Registration Unit (SOAR). The SOAR unit is responsible for 
registering and tracking sex offenders as required by the Delaware Sex Offender Registry Law (Megan’s Law). Currently 4,755 indi-
2019 Annual Report  37State Bureau of Identification  - Captain Benjamin Parsons
viduals are registered as sex offenders in the State of Delaware. SOAR unit consists of 14 employees including five sworn detectives, 
four agents and five civilians. The sworn detectives are assigned to conduct criminal investigations of offenders who fail to follow 
Delaware’s Megan’s Law requirements. The four agents are retired police officers who conduct statewide investigations and notifi -
cations for all offenders residing in State Police jurisdiction. This investigative unit also performed 1,239 Megan Law notifications, 
conducted 430 sex offender related criminal investigations and arrested 117 sex offenders for registry violations.
SBI will continue to focus on providing the best possible service to all citizenry and law enforcement agencies in 2020.
 
With an overall mission to reduce motor vehicle collisions, the Traffic Operations Section performs an array of diverse functions. 
Led by Captain Glenn Dixon and Lt. Tracy Condon, section personnel coordinate divisional traffic enforcement while conducting 
statewide crash record-keeping. The section also includes our Commercial Motor Vehicle Enforcement Unit (CMVEU). Additional 
enhancements to roadway safety are carried out via the Electronic Red Light Safety Program (ERLSP).
2019 fatal crashes in Delaware resulted in the deaths of 133 people in 123 crashes. Driver inattention/distraction/fatigue, following 
too closely, and failing to yield right of way were the primary contributing circumstances for crashes in Delaware. The Delaware 
State Police investigated a total of 21,510 collisions in 2019. This is a reduction from the previous year. In an effort to reduce this 
needless suffering, the Delaware State Police participated in numerous traffic enforcement campaigns, most of which were funded 
through Delaware’s Office of Highway Safety (OHS). Additionally, the Division specifically targeted crash producing behaviors via 
monthly traffic action plans. All eight patrol troops implemented their monthly action plan based on collision trends, dangerous driv-
ing behavior, and citizen complaints that were specific to each troop’s area of responsibility. Police presence was notably increased 
on targeted highways through the Drive to Zero Enforcement, Pedestrian Safety Enforcement, and the Drive to Save Lives initiative. 
OHS also assisted with DUI, Aggressive Driving, Child Restraint, Pedestrian, and Seatbelt violation enforcement funding. These ini-
tiatives focused on holidays, summer months, special events, and identified problem areas.
Administrative personnel, working out of the DSP HQ complex in Dover, fulfill several duties and responsibilities. Among them is 
the development of traffic initiatives, programs and campaigns to promote increased police presence and enforcement on Delaware 
roadways. This is accomplished using analytical tools, including the Fatal Analysis Report System (FARS) and the Divisional 
Statistician. The ERLSP reviewed 78,428 red light violations with 54,869 assessments being issued via the ERLSP to assist in the 
efforts of overall crash reduction.
Collection, archiving, and dissemination of motor vehicle collision reports is another responsibility of the Traffic Section via three 
valued civilian personnel. In 2019, section personnel processed 18,489 requests for collision reports from the public, attorneys, insur -
ance companies and government agencies. Of those requests, 17,108 reports were copied and distributed.
Commercial vehicle safety is the mission of the Traffic Section’s CMVEU. Personnel work jointly toward efforts in height, weight, 
length enforcement as well as Motor Carrier Safety regarding both moving violations and infractions found during commercial vehi-
cle inspections. Personnel are responsible for the operation of the Blackbird and RT 301 weigh facilities. They also utilize portable 
scales to conduct commercial vehicle weight checks and ensure size regulation adherence throughout the state. In conjunction with 
DelDOT, Virtual Weigh Stations which include Weigh in Motion Sensors, LPR systems, DOT readers and over-height sensors, were 
installed at each of the weigh stations. These technologies dramatically increase the number of commercial motor vehicles that can be 
screened at the weigh stations, and increases the efficiency of truck enforcement operations. In addition, a Virtual Weigh Station has 
been installed on Rt. 1 n/b prior to the Blackbird Weigh Station, to detect commercial motor vehicles that may be in violation and to 
direct them to the scale house for further screening. MCSAP personnel conduct inspections of commercial vehicles and their opera-
tors at various locations throughout the state and at the Division’s two weigh facilities.
38  Delaware State PoliceTraffic Operations  - Captain Glenn Dixon
The Delaware State Police Training Academy, located on the Headquarters complex in Dover, serves as the 
State’s only residential police training facility. The ‘brick and mortar’ Academy building has stood at this 
location since 1969 and is every bit as relevant today as it was 51 years ago. The Training Academy Table 
of Organization includes both the Academy and the Firearms Training Unit/Facility which is located North 
of Smyrna.
The 2019 Training Academy Staff consisted of the following personnel: Mrs. Susan McNatt (Administrative 
Specialist), Mr. James Howard (Culinary Specialist), Master Corporal Larry Walther (TAC Trooper), 
Master Corporal Amber Smith (TAC Trooper), Sergeant Jonathon Packard (Senior TAC Trooper), Lieutenant David Diana (Assistant 
Director of Training) and Captain J. Sapp (Director of Training and Delaware Council on Police Training Administrator).
During the course of 2019 the Training Academy was tasked with the training, development and ultimate law enforcement certi -
fication of seventy-one (71) women and men by way of the 92B DSP/88th Municipal and the 93rd DSP/89th Municipal Classes. 
Both Classes navigated the necessarily rigorous Academy experience while being exposed to roughly 1,400 hours of training. These 
women and men represented fourteen allied agencies from throughout the State of Delaware in addition to the Delaware State Police.
The Training Academy Staff, in addition to working diligently to ensure that all Recruits were provided with the most well-conceived 
and relevant training, also worked diligently to ensure that incumbent Divisional members both sworn and civilian, as well as law 
enforcement Officers from throughout the State and region, were afforded meaningful training opportunities throughout the year. 
In addition to the mandatory In-Service trainings provided, the Training Academy Staff offered eighty-one (81) elective courses for 
consumption in 2019. The offered courses covered a wide range of topics deemed relevant to the realities and many challenges of the 
law enforcement profession in 2019.
The Training Academy Staff also worked to support a host of significant endeavors during the course of 2019 such as the 15th 
Leadership Development Course and the 48th Trooper Youth Week program in conjunction with the American Legion.
The 2019 Firearms Training Unit Staff consisted of Senior Corporal Phillip Kebles (Firearms Instructor), Master Corporal Ronald 
Malkin (Firearms Instructor), Master Corporal David Myers (Firearms Instructor), Master Corporal Carey Brower (Firearms 
Instructor), Sergeant Edwin Justiniano (Senior Firearms Instructor) and Lieutenant Michael Wysock (F.T.U. OIC).
During the course of 2019 the Firearms Training Unit was tasked with both basic and advanced firearms training for both Recruit and 
incumbent personnel, progression of the Division’s employment of the ALERRT principles related to active shooter incidents, the 
maintenance of training/certifications related to multiple weapons systems, the responsibility for continued LEOSA (HR 218) qual-
ifications for retired Divisional personnel, and the responsibility of re-certifying multiple firearms instructors from across the State. 
Moreover, the Firearms Training Unit worked to help facilitate a significant renovation of the firing range that impacted operations 
for a significant portion of the year.
In closing, all members of the Training Academy and Firearms Training Unit maintained their commitment to provide the most pro-
fessional and relevant training to all Divisional members as well as Officers from allied agencies during 2019. While committed to 
the Divisions’ Core Values of Honor, Integrity, Courage, Loyalty, Attitude, Discipline and Service both teams will strive to carry their 
passion for training into 2020 with the goal of providing the residents of the State of Delaware with the most professionally trained 
law enforcement officers in the world!
The section provides direct and indirect vehicle maintenance support for all eight patrol troops and Headquarters for a fleet of over 
900 vehicles, consisting of a wide variety of vehicles used for patrol, special operations and day-to-day operations. Such vehicles 
range from pursuit rated patrol vehicles, 4-wheel all-terrain vehicles, trucks, trailers and a freight-liner mobile command posts. The 
day-to-day maintenance operation ensures that a safe and serviceable fleet is readily available to support the various aspects of the 
law enforcement services provided by Delaware State Police.
2019 Annual Report  39Transportation  - Mr. Lonnie JudyTraining Academy  - Captain J. Sapp

The staff also handles the purchasing, and deployment of all divisional vehicles, as well as, the deactivation and sale of vehicles that 
are no longer needed or are not economically feasible to maintain. The transportation section continues to conduct “tests and eval -
uations” on a variety of police equipment to include emergency lighting, weapon racks, safety partitions, computer consoles, radar  
placement and both pursuit and non-pursuit vehicle platforms to ensure that the Delaware State Police has the best equipment needed 
to safely serve the citizens they protect.
The Transportation Section maintains the largest cost center, it is budgeted to fund fuel, parts, repairs for all assigned vehicles and 
vehicle replacements. Commercial maintenance services are incorporated in to the maintenance system and used for overflow work, 
specialized work and the more time consuming repair tasks.
The Victim Services Section is responsible for providing quality service to the citizens of Delaware, as well as visitors to our state, 
who may become a victim of crime or to those who have lost a loved one due to a sudden tragic death. The service may be in the 
form of crisis intervention, information and/or referrals. Our unit provides assistance to cases within the Delaware State Police juris-
diction as well as to over 35 other municipal departments throughout the state (Delaware Victim Center).
In 2019, the unit provided services to over 4,500 unduplicated clients. All cases are provided with contact for up to one year and 
sometimes beyond.
The Victim Service Specialists continue to be a tremendous asset to the Division of State Police as well as the citizens and visitors of 
our state who enter our criminal justice system by issues beyond their control. The unit is under the Direction of Debra Reed, located 
at Headquarters. The advocates, who are located at various offices throughout the state, include Veronica Colombo, Casey Wilson, 
Nancy Will, Nina Brown, Crystal Dalton and Corrie Schmitt. In 2019, Ms. Viviane Sanchez joined our unit as the Bilingual advocate 
located out of Troop 6 but providing statewide assistance. In a very short time, Ms. Sanchez has become a huge asset to our unit and 
the Division overall. Ms. Angela Brown is the Administrative specialist who provides supportive services to all advocates statewide 
as well as crisis services through answering our 24 hour toll free hot-line.
This year, we were able to promote two of our Sr. Victim Specialists to new positions with the assistance of federal grant funding, 
administered through the Criminal Justice Council. Ms. Veronica Colombo was promoted to the position of Assistant Coordinator of 
the overall unit. Ms. Colombo earned this position through her years of dedication, support, exceptional time management and orga-
nizational skills. Ms. Nancy Will was appointed to the newly created “Special Case Coordinator” position. In this role she will focus 
on specialized and/or under-served crime victimization areas to include Human Trafficking, hate crimes, high risk domestic violence, 
opioid deaths etc. Ms. Will has years of experience providing quality services to victims of crime as well as collaboration with vari-
ous law enforcement and other agencies to address the needs of victims. Well-earned advancements for both of these ladies.
The Victim Specialists are in an “on call rotation” to respond to requests for service 24 hours a day. The Specialists are available to 
respond to crime scenes, hospitals, homes, court hearings and/or to provide support by telephone. The unit also operates a 24-hour 
toll free hot-line. In addition to the civilian staff, approximately 25 sworn members of the division are cross-trained to assist with vic-
tim service “call outs” throughout the state. In 2019, there were over 200 requests for immediate assistance or “call outs” with over 
20,000 follow up contacts.
The Victim Services unit has been actively participating with specialized units within DSP and federal partners to address the issue of 
Human Trafficking. Debra Reed was appointed by the Governor to the newly formed Human Trafficking Inter-agency Coordinating 
Council.
Members of the Victim Service Section continue to be very dedicated to providing quality service and support to crime victims as 
well as guidance to police and outside agencies.
40  Delaware State PoliceVictim Services Section  - Ms. Debra M. Reed
2019 Annual Report  41In 2019, Detective Jean initiated fifty-three investigations leading to the execution of five search warrants. Of the fifty-three inves-
tigations, he conducted a total of eighteen direct purchases. He currently leads the unit in direct buys by a significant margin. Of the 
eighteen direct purchases, Detective Jean has purchased four firearms to include two AK-47 rifles and two shotguns. Additionally, 
Detective Jean is responsible for the recovery of thirty-six additional firearms by means of controlled purchases, search warrants, 
working with confidential informants providing weapon locations and providing pivotal information linking suspects to recovered 
firearms during the course of felony level investigations.
Detective Jean’s investigations have led to the confiscation of dangerous drugs as well. In 2019 Detective Jean confiscated the fol-
lowing during his investigations: 58 schedule III narcotic pills, 66 schedule IV narcotic pills, 35 schedule II oxycodone pills, 324 
grams of marijuana, 200 ml of promethazine with codeine, 2,000 ml of “lean”, 126 THC vapor cartridges, 76.3 grams of crack 
cocaine and 19.9 grams of powder cocaine. Detective Jean also has input sixty intelligence reports into the Patriarch system to date.
This is just a snapshot of the caliber of work Detective Jean does on a day to day basis. He works tirelessly to make Delaware a safer 
state. He works very well with his unit, other investigative units and other departments both a local and federal level.2019 Trooper of the Year - Cpl/1 Jean
Corrie began her career with the State of Delaware as a Probation and Parole officer. Although the agency recognized her as being a 
great Officer, Corrie had a desire to work with victims and the DSP was fortunate to bring her on board in the Victim Services unit in 
2007.
Corrie Schmitt has consistently been a reliable, committed and available employee throughout her entire employment with DSP. She 
is someone who can be counted on at all times. She is often called upon to respond out, after hours, even when she is not the sched-
uled on call advocate. She always responds and provides the most compassionate, thoughtful care without complaint or reservation. 
Although Corrie is an employee who consistently goes above and beyond, 2019 was a year in which she was asked to take on a 
larger area of jurisdiction which included much more responsibility, 2 additional troops and 6 additional municipal departments. The 
typical caseload for a Victim Specialist can range from 40-50 cases a month. Corrie began handling almost double that amount aver -
aging approximately 80 cases per month. In two different months, she handled 100 cases. She didn’t just handle them, she treated 
each individual victim with care and compassion, making sure that she provided the appropriate resources and assisted them through 
their experience in the Criminal Justice system.
Corrie is also an integral part of the planning team for the Annual Crime Victim Tribute, The training committee for the Human 
Trafficking Coordinating council, VOCA grant advisory board for A.I DuPont hospital and others. Corrie has also been instrumental 
in the training of new employees. She spends weeks with a new advocate shadowing them and then will accompany the advocate to 
provide guidance for the best learning opportunity. Corrie is a quiet leader in the unit. She is always one of the first to offer assis-
tance and never shy’s away when asked to respond or take on responsibilities outside of her assigned tasks. Corrie does an outstand-
ing job each and every day, year in and year out, but 2019 was certainly a year worth highlighting.2019 Civilian of the Year - Corrie Schmitt
Headquarters
1441 N. DuPont Highway
P.O. Box 430
Dover, Delaware 19903-
0430
(302) 739-5901
Recruitment Line  
(302) 739-7300
Troop One
603 Philadelphia Pike
Wilmington, Delaware 
19809
(302) 761-6677
Troop Two
100 Corporal Stephen J 
Ballard Way
Newark, Delaware 19702
(302) 834-2620Troop Three
3759 South State Street
Camden, DE 19934 
(302) 697-4454
Troop Four
23652 Shortly Road
Georgetown, Delaware 
19947
(302) 856-5850
Troop Five
9265 Public Safety Way
Bridgeville, Delaware 
19933
(302) 337-1090Troop Six
3301 Kirkwood Highway
Wilmington, Delaware 
19808
(302) 633-5000
Troop Seven
19444 Mulberry Knoll Road
Lewes, Delaware 19958
(302) 644-5020
Troop Nine
414 Main Street
P.O. Box 627
Odessa, Delaware 19730
(302) 378-5749
www.dsp.delaware.govDelaware  State Police

